Alabama Law Institute
Alimony
January 2016
Chairman
Dean Noah Funderburg
ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Melanie Atha Judge Terry Moore
Judge William Bell Bryan Morgan
David Broome Judge Deborah Bell Paseur
Jennifer Bush Julia Smeds Roth
Amy Creech Judge Jimmy Sandlin
Judge Don Davis Stephen Shaw
Trey Dowdy Judge Paul Sherling
Robbie Lusk Judge Brenda Stedham
Bob Maddox Justice Lyn Stuart
Judge Alice Martin Col. Terry Travis
Randy Nichols Drew Whitmire
Jim Jeffries, Jr.
Stephen Johnson Ex Officio:
Representative Mike Jones Justice Mike Bolin
Sammye Kok Senator Cam Ward
Judge Philip Lisenby
12PREFACE
The Alabama Law Institute presents to the Bench and Bar
of Alabama, for consideration and constructive criticism, the
following proposed act.
This act will apply to divorce, legal separations or
annulment actions that are filed after the effective date of this act.
Existing case and statutory law will govern alimony awards for
cases filed prior to the effective date of this act, January 1, 2017.
This act continues the existing law of allowing the court to
award interim alimony, but adds an enumeration of the factors for
the court to consider when determining whether to award interim
alimony. The court may also order the litigation cost and expenses,
including attorney fees, necessary to pursue or defend the action
out of marital property.
While the act does continue the existing law of allowing the
court to award alimony after a final decree, the act does establish
priorities, limitations and factors to be considered when making an
award. First, unless the court expressly finds that rehabilitative
alimony is not feasible, the court is to only award rehabilitative
alimony, which is limited to five years, absent extraordinary
circumstances.
Second, if the court determines that rehabilitative alimony
is not feasible or has failed, the court may award periodic alimony.
Generally, for marriages of less than 20 years, periodic alimony
shall be limited to a period not to exceed the length of the
marriage. If the parties have been married for 20 years or longer,
the time limit on the eligibility to receive alimony does not apply.
However, both rehabilitative and periodic alimony continue to
terminate upon remarriage or cohabitation as provided in current
law.
Modification of both rehabilitative and periodic alimony
continues to be allowed based on a showing of a material change in
circumstances. Also, unchanged is the current law that if there is
not an award of alimony nor a reservation of jurisdiction for
awarding alimony at the time of the divorce, the court permanently
loses the ability to subsequently award alimony.
This act was the result of a great deal of scholarly work by
a committee of judges, professors, and practitioners with extensive
backgrounds in this area of the law. The committee was chaired
3by Dean Noah Funderburg and Penny Davis served the committee
as Reporter.
Othni J. Lathram
Director
January 2016
4A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
Relating to alimony; to provide for an award of interim alimony in
an action for divorce, legal separation, or annulment under certain
conditions; to provide for the modification of interim alimony
awards; to provide for the termination of an interim alimony
award; to provide for an award of rehabilitative or periodic
alimony under certain conditions upon the granting of a divorce or
legal separation; to provide for modification of an order awarding
rehabilitative or periodic alimony; and to provide for termination
of an award of rehabilitative or periodic alimony.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1.
(a) (1) In an action for divorce, legal separation, or annulment,
the court may award either spouse interim alimony based
upon a showing of all of the following:
a. The spouse maintains the validity of the marriage.
b. The spouse needs interim alimony, after taking
into consideration any other financial contributions
5provided by the other spouse pursuant to other
interim orders of the court.
c. The other spouse has the ability to pay interim
alimony.
(2) An award under subdivision (1) may be made
retroactive to the date of the filing of the complaint. The
amount awarded shall be based on the applicable factors for
awarding rehabilitative or periodic alimony as established
in subsections (d), (e), and (f) of Section 2.
(b) An order awarding interim alimony may be terminated or
prospectively modified at any time prior to the entry of a final
judgment for good cause shown. In case of an emergency, the
court may order or prospectively modify interim alimony without
notice to the other party pursuant to Rule 65, Alabama Rules of
Civil Procedure, subject to the right of the other party to a hearing
as soon as practicable for the purpose of determining whether the
emergency order should be dissolved, maintained, or modified.
(c) An order awarding interim alimony shall automatically
terminate upon entry of the final judgment, the voluntary dismissal
6of all pending claims, or the abatement of the proceedings, subject
to the following:
(1) The jurisdiction of the court to continue or
prospectively modify the interim alimony during a pending
appeal, including a petition for a writ of certiorari, of the
final judgment.
(2) The right of either party to file a subsequent action to
recover any arrearage or overage accumulated prior to the
termination of the order.
(d) In an action for divorce, legal separation, annulment, or appeals
thereof, the court may award out of the marital property or current
income reasonable interim fees, costs, and litigation expenses,
including discovery, expert witnesses, guardians ad litem, special
masters, and attorney fees, to enable each party to have equitable
access to the marital property to pursue or defend the action. A
denial of the requested motion for interim fees, costs, and litigation
expenses does not preclude the court from making such an award.
Upon final order, the court shall consider any award or other
payments made for interim fees, costs, or litigation expenses.
7Section 2.
(a) Upon granting a divorce or legal separation, the court shall
award either rehabilitative or periodic alimony as provided in
subsection (b), if the court expressly finds all of the following:
(1) A party lacks a separate estate or his or her separate
estate is insufficient to enable the party to acquire the
ability to preserve, to the extent possible, the economic
status quo of the parties as it existed during the marriage.
(2) The other party has the ability to supply those means
without undue economic hardship.
(3) The circumstances of the case make it equitable.
(b) If a party has met the requirements of subsection (a) of this
section, the court shall award alimony in the following priority:
(1) Unless the court expressly finds that rehabilitative
alimony is not feasible, the court shall award rehabilitative
alimony to the party for a limited duration, not to exceed
five years, absent extraordinary circumstances, of an
amount to enable the party to acquire the ability to
preserve, to the extent possible, the economic status quo of
the parties as it existed during the marriage.
8(2) In cases in which the court expressly finds that
rehabilitation is not feasible, a good-faith attempt at
rehabilitation fails, or good-faith rehabilitation only enables
the party to partially acquire the ability to preserve, to the
extent possible, the economic status quo of the parties as it
existed during the marriage, the court shall award the party
periodic installments of alimony for a duration and an
amount to allow the party to preserve, to the extent
possible, the economic status quo of the parties as it existed
during the marriage as provided in subsection (g) of
Section 2.
(c) In cases in which a party has proven a lack of means to acquire
the ability to preserve, to the extent possible, the economic status
quo of the parties as it existed during the marriage, but there exists
a present inability of the other party to supply those means, a court,
when the circumstances of the case make it equitable, shall reserve
jurisdiction to award rehabilitative or periodic alimony. If there is
neither an award of alimony nor a reservation of jurisdiction at the
time of the divorce, the court shall permanently lose jurisdiction to
subsequently make an award of rehabilitative or periodic alimony.
9(d) In determining whether a party has a sufficient separate estate
to preserve, to the extent possible, the economic status quo of the
parties as it existed during the marriage, the court shall consider
any and all relevant evidence, including all of the following:
(1) The party's own individual assets.
(2) The marital property received by or awarded to the
party.
(3) The liabilities of the party following the distribution of
marital property.
(4) The party's own wage-earning capacity, taking into
account the age, health, education, and work experience of
the party as well as the prevailing economic conditions.
(5) Any benefits that will assist the party in obtaining and
maintaining gainful employment.
(6) That the party has primary physical custody of a child
of the marriage whose condition or circumstances make it
appropriate that the party not be required to seek
employment outside the home.
(7) Any other factor the court deems equitable under the
circumstances of the case.
10(e) In determining whether the other party has the ability to pay
alimony, the court shall consider any and all evidence, including
all of the following:
(1) His or her own individual assets, except those assets
protected from use for the payment of alimony by federal
law.
(2) The marital property received by or awarded to him or
her.
(3) His or her liabilities following the distribution of
marital property.
(4) His or her net income.
(5) His or her wage-earning ability, considering his or her
age, health, education, professional licensing, work history,
family commitments, and prevailing economic conditions.
(6) That he or she has primary physical custody of a child
of the marriage whose condition or circumstances make it
appropriate that he or she not be required to maintain
employment outside the home.
(7) Any other factor the court deems equitable under the
circumstances of the case.
11(f) In determining whether the award of rehabilitative or periodic
alimony is equitable, the court shall consider all relevant factors
including all of the following:
(1) The length of the marriage.
(2) The standard of living to which the parties became
accustomed during the marriage.
(3) The relative fault of the parties for the breakdown of the
marriage.
(4) The age and health of the parties.
(5) The future employment prospects of the parties.
(6) The contribution of the one party to the education or
earning ability of the other party.
(7) The extent to which one party reduced his or her
income or career opportunities for the benefit of the other
party or the family.
(8) Excessive or abnormal expenditures, destruction,
concealment, or fraudulent disposition of property.
(9) All actual damages and judgments from conduct
resulting in criminal conviction of either spouse in which
the other spouse or child of the marriage was the victim.
12(10) Any other factor the court deems equitable under the
circumstances of the case.
(g) Except upon a finding by the court that a deviation from the
time limits of this section is equitably required, a person shall be
eligible for periodic alimony for a period not to exceed the length
of the marriage, as of the date of the filing of the complaint, with
the exception that if a party is married for 20 years or longer, there
shall be no time limit as to his or her eligibility.
(h) An order awarding rehabilitative or periodic alimony may be
modified based upon application and a showing of material change
in circumstances.
(i) Rehabilitative or periodic alimony awarded underthis section
terminates as provided in Section 30-2-55, Code of Alabama 1975,
or upon the death of either spouse.
Section 3. This act governs only actions for divorce, legal
separation, or annulment filed after the effective date of this act.
This act does not govern any actions concerning alimony in any
13case concerning divorce, legal separation, or annulment that was
filed before the effective date of this act.
Section 4. This act shall become effective on January 1, 2017,
following its passage and approval by the Governor, or its
otherwise becoming law.
Alabama Comment
Section 1
Subsection (a) provides that a party seeking interim
alimony cannot, at the same time, refute the existence of the
marriage. An award of interim alimony may be made retroactive
to the date of the filing of the complaint.
Subsection (b) provides that there must be a material
change in circumstances in order for the court to vacate or
prospectively modify the interim alimony award. Emergency relief
may be sought pursuant to Rule 65 of the Alabama Rules of Civil
Procedure.
Although the interim alimony award terminates upon a
final judgment, under subsection (c) the court retains jurisdiction to
continue to prospectively modify the interim alimony during a
pending appeal. Notwithstanding, a party may file a subsequent
action to recover any arrearage or overage accumulated prior to the
termination of the order.
Subsection (d) is included to ensure that marital financial
resources are available to both parties to pursue or defend the
action and to prohibit one party from limiting the other party’s
access to marital property during the action.
No appeal lies from an interlocutory order awarding interim
alimony, but the Alabama Court of Civil Appeals may review such
order by way of a petition for a writ of mandamus.
14Section 2
Subsection (a) establishes the criteria that the applicant
spouse must meet to be entitled to an award of alimony. Once the
criterion in subsection (a) for an award of alimony has been met,
subsection (b) establishes the priority for the award. First, if
feasible, the court shall award rehabilitative alimony rather than
periodic alimony. If rehabilitative alimony is not feasible or fails to
achieve or maintain, insofar as is possible, the economic status quo
of the parties as it existed during the marriage, then the court shall
award periodic alimony.
Subsection (c) provides for the reservation for the future
award of alimony. Also, unchanged is the current law that if there
is no an award of alimony nor a reservation of jurisdiction for
awarding alimony at the time of the divorce, the court permanently
loses the ability to subsequently make an award of alimony.
The evidence to be considered by the court when determining
whether the applicant spouse has a sufficient estate is enumerated
in Subsection (d). See Miller v. Miller, 695 So.2d 1192 (Ala. Civ.
App. 1997) ; DeShazo v. DeShazo, 582 So.2d 564, 565
(Ala.Civ.App.1991); and Treusdell v. Treusdell, 671 So.2d 699,
704 (Ala.Civ.App.1995). The evidence to be considered by the
court in its determination of whether the responding spouse has the
ability to pay alimony is enumerated in Subsection (e). See, Rieger
v. Rieger, 147 So. 3d 421(ACA 2013).
Subsection (f) list the factors the court shall utilize when
determining whether the award of alimony is equitable. See, eg.,
Stone v. Stone, 26 So.3d 1232, 1236 (Ala.Civ.App.2009) ( length
of marriage) ; Washington v. Washington, 24 So.3d 1126, 1135–36
(Ala.Civ.App.2009) (standard of living); Lackey v. Lackey, 18
So.3d 393, 401 (Ala.Civ.App.2009) (fault); Ex parte Elliott, 782
So.2d 308, 311 (Ala.2000) (age and health of parties); and Baggett
v. Baggett, 855 So.2d 556, 559 (Ala.Civ.App.2003) (future
employment prospects).
The duration for the award of periodic alimony is established
in subsection (g). Generally, for marriages of less than 20 years,
periodic alimony shall be limited to a period not to exceed the
length of the marriage. Nonetheless, if the court determines that
equity so requires, the court can deviate from the time limits
established in this section. If the parties have been married for 20
years or longer, the time limitation on the eligibility to receive
alimony does not apply.
15Consistent with current law, under subsection (h), alimony may
be modified based on a material change in circumstances.
Likewise, subsection (i) is consistent with current law by providing
that alimony terminates upon the death of either spouse or as is
provided in section 30-2-55 of the Code of Alabama.
Section 3
Because Alabama considers property settlements and the
determination of the equity of awarding alimony “as matters that
must be considered together”, this act only has prospective
application since a property settlement cannot be modified once it
becomes final. Rieger v. Rieger, 147 So.3d 421,434 (Ala. 2013).
16Alabama Law Institute
Common Law Marriage Statute
January 2016
Chairman
Dean Noah Funderburg
ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Melanie Atha Judge Terry Moore
Judge William Bell Bryan Morgan
David Broome Judge Deborah Bell Paseur
Jennifer Bush Julia Smeds Roth
Amy Creech Judge Jimmy Sandlin
Judge Don Davis Stephen Shaw
Trey Dowdy Judge Paul Sherling
Robbie Lusk Judge Brenda Stedham
Bob Maddox Justice Lyn Stuart
Judge Alice Martin Col. Terry Travis
Randy Nichols Drew Whitmire
Jim Jeffries, Jr.
Stephen Johnson Ex Officio:
Representative Mike Jones Justice Mike Bolin
Sammye Kok Senator Cam Ward
Judge Philip Lisenby
1718PREFACE
The Alabama Law Institute presents to the Bench and Bar
of Alabama, for consideration and constructive criticism, the
following proposed act.
Alabama is in the minority of states that has retain common
law marriage. This Act codifies the current elements required to
establish the existence of a common law marriage and provides
two methods of proving the existence of a common law marriage
in Alabama. The first method of proving the existence of a
common law marriage is by executing and filing a Declaration of
Common Law Marriage pursuant to this act. The filing of a
Declaration of Common Law Marriage is new to Alabama and is
based on the Texas Statutory Informal Marriage Act. A
Declaration of Common Law Marriage execute and recorded as
provided by this act is prima facie evidence of the marriage of the
parties.
The second method of proving the existence of a common
law marriage codifies the existing law of proving, by clear and
convincing evidence, the existence of all of the elements of a
common law marriage. When a party is attempting to prove the
existence of a common law marriage by proving each element, the
act creates a rebuttable presumption that the parties entered into an
agreement to be married if both parties have asserted that they are
married in certain enumerated legal documents, such as income tax
forms.
The act prohibits a person under the age of 19 years from
entering into a common law marriage which differs from existing
case law.
A Declaration of Common Law Marriage can only be filed
by residents of Alabama in the Probate Office of their county of
residence and both parties must be present to file the document and
show proof of their age and identity.
This act was the result of a great deal of scholarly work by
a committee of judges, professors, and practitioners with extensive
backgrounds in this area of the law. The committee was chaired
by Dean Noah Funderburg and Penny Davis served the committee
as Reporter.
Othni J. Lathram
Director
January 2016
1920SECTION 1. PROOF OF COMMON LAW
MARRIAGE
(a) The common law marriage between two individuals
may be proved:
(1) By evidence that a Declaration of Common
Law marriage has been signed and recorded as provided by this
act; or
(2) By clear and convincing evidence of the
existence of all of the following elements of a common law
marriage:
(a) Capacity;
(b) Present, mutual agreement to permanently
enter the marriage relationship to the exclusion
of all other relationships; and
(c) Public recognition of the relationship as a
marriage, public assumption of marital duties,
and cohabitation.
(b) An individual who has knowingly assumed the
position in a judicial proceeding that he entered into a common law
marriage with another person is estopped from assuming a position
inconsistent with the individual’s prior position which prejudices
the other person to whom he asserted that he had entered into a
common law marriage.
(c) In a proceeding in which a marriage is to be proved
as provided by subsection (a) (2), it is rebuttably presumed that the
parties did enter into an agreement to be married if both parties
signed:
(1) A federal or state income tax form stating that
they are married;
21(2) A health insurance document claiming they are
married; or
(3) Any other legal document under oath claiming
they are married.
(d) A person under 19 years of age may not:
(1) Be a party to a common law marriage; or
(2) Execute a Declaration of Common Law
Marriage under Section 2.
(e) A person may not be a party to a common law
marriage or execute a Declaration of Common Law Marriage if the
person is presently married to a person who is not the other party
to the purported common law marriage or the purported
Declaration of Common Law Marriage, as applicable.
SECTION 2. DECLARATION AND
REGISTRATION OF COMMON LAW MARRIAGE.
(a) A Declaration of Common Law Marriage must
be signed on a form prescribed by the Alabama Administrative
Office of Courts. Each party to the declaration shall provide the
information required in the form.
(b) The declaration form must contain the following and
be stated in substantially the same form as follows:
(1) A heading entitled "Declaration and
Registration of Common law marriage, ___________ County,
Alabama";
(2) Spaces for each party's full name, including
the name on each party’s current birth certificate, current address,
date of birth, place of birth, including city, county, and state;
22(3) A space for indicating the type of document
tendered by each party as proof of age and identity;
(4) A certification that: "The other party is not
related to me as:
(A) An ancestor or descendant, by blood
or adoption;
(B) A brother or sister, of the whole or
half blood or by adoption;
(C) A stepchild or stepparent, while the
marriage creating the relationship exists;
(D) An aunt, uncle, nephew or niece of the
whole or half-blood";
(5) A certification that both parties are currently
residents of the State of Alabama and a space for the parties to list
their current address;
(6) A space for the date on or about which the
parties are asserting is the date they entered into a common law
marriage;
(7) A printed declaration and oath reading:
"I SOLEMNLY SWEAR (OR AFFIRM) THAT
WE, THE UNDERSIGNED, ARE MARRIED TO
EACH OTHER BY VIRTUE OF THE
FOLLOWING FACTS: ON OR ABOUT
_______________ (DATE) WE MET ALL OF
THE FOLLOWING ELEMENTS OF A
COMMON LAW MARRIAGE; (A) CAPACITY;
(B) PRESENT, MUTUAL AGREEMENT TO
PERMANENTLY ENTER THE MARRIAGE
RELATIONSHIP TO THE EXCLUSION OF
ALL OTHER RELATIONSHIPS; AND (C)
PUBLIC RECOGNITION OF THE
RELATIONSHIP AS A MARRIAGE, PUBLIC
23ASSUMPTION OF MARITAL DUTIES, AND
COHABITATION. THIS DECLARATION IS
TRUE AND THE INFORMATION IN IT
WHICH I HAVE GIVEN IS CORRECT.";
(8) Spaces immediately below the printed
declaration and oath for the parties' signatures; and
(9) A certificate of the notary public, stated in
substantially the same form as follows:
Personally appeared before me ___________________
_________________, who provided proof of his or her
identity by presenting to me one of documents listed
below as indicated by the checked box;
[ ] Certified Birth Certificate;
[ ] I.D. or identification cards that complies with
REAL ID Act of 2005; or
[ ] National Government Passport.
And having first been duly sworn, did hereby swear or
affirm that all of the statements contained in the above
and foregoing Declaration of Common Law Marriage are
true and correct.
Sworn to and subscribed before me on this the
___ day of ________, 20__.
________________________________
Notary Public
Expire on: ________________
Seal
Personally appeared before me
____________________________________, who
provided proof of his or her identity by presenting to me
one of documents listed below as indicated by the
checked box;
[ ] Certified Birth Certificate;
24[ ] I.D. or identification cards that complies with
REAL ID Act of 2005; or
[ ] National Government Passport.
And having first been duly sworn, did hereby swear or
affirm that all of the statements contained in the above
and foregoing Declaration of Common Law Marriage are
true and correct.
Sworn to and subscribed before me on this the
___ day of ________, 20__.
________________________________
Notary Public
Expire on: ________________
Seal
SECTION 3. PROOF OF IDENTITY AND AGE;
OFFENSE.
(a) The notary public shall require proof of the
identity and age of each party to the Declaration of Common Law
Marriage to be established by one of the documents listed below:
1. Certified Birth Certificate;
2. Star I.D. or identification card that
complies with the REAL ID Act of 2005;
or
3. National Government Passport.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly
provides false, fraudulent, or otherwise inaccurate proof of the
person's identity or age under this section. An offense under this
subsection is a Class A misdemeanor.
25SECTION 4. RECORDING OF DECLARATION OF
COMMON LAW MARRIAGE.
(a) Both parties seeking to record a Declaration of
Common Law Marriage must personally appear together before the
clerk in the office of the judge of probate and present to the clerk
the executed Declaration of Common Law Marriage and the proof
of verification of the age and identity of each party. Upon the
receipt of the executed Declaration of Common Law Marriage and
verification of the age and identity of the parties, the clerk in office
of the probate judge in the county where both parties reside shall
record the Declaration of Common Law Marriage, return to the
parties the original of the Declaration and the proof of the age and
the identity of the parties and send a copy of the Declaration of
Common Law Marriage to the Office of vital Statistics.
(b) A fee for the recording of the Declaration of Common
Law Marriage shall be charged by the Judge of Probate in the
county in which the license is recorded. The fees charged shall be
the same amount as the fees that are charged for the issuance and
recording of a marriage license in that county and shall be
disbursed in the same manner.
(c) An executed Declaration of Common Law Marriage
recorded as provided in this act is prima facie evidence of the
marriage of the parties.
Alabama Comment
This act is based on the Texas Statutory Informal Marriage
Act.
Section 1.
Subsection (a) provides two methods of proving the
existence of a common law marriage in Alabama. The first is by
executing and filing a Declaration of Common Law Marriage
pursuant to this act. The second method codifies the existing law of
proving, by clear and convincing evidence, the existence of all of
26the elements of a common law marriage. Skipworth v. Skipworth,
360 So.2d 975 (Ala. 1978); Baker v. Townsend, 484 So. 2d 1097
(Ala. Civ. App. 1986); Walton v. Walton 409 So. 2d 858 (Ala. Civ.
App. 1982); Luther v. M & M Chemical Co., 475 So. 2d 191 (Ala.
Civ. App. 1985).
Subsection (b) codifies the Doctrine of Judicial Estoppel.
Under the Doctrine of Judicial Estoppel, a party is precluded from
asserting a claim in a legal proceeding that is inconsistent with a
claim taken by that party in a previous legal proceeding. Russell v.
Russell, 404 So. 2d 662 (Ala. 1981); McGlaughn v. McGlaughn,
611 So. 2d 382 (Ala. Civ. App. 1992); Keeton v. Big Lots Stores,
Inc., 84 F.Supp. 3d 1290 (N. Dist. Ala. 2015); New Hampshire v.
Manin, 532 U.S. 742 (2001).
When a party is attempting to prove the existence of a
common law marriage by proving each element, subsection (c)
creates a rebuttable presumption that the parties entered into an
agreement to be married if both parties have asserted, in certain
enumerated legal documents, that they are married.
Subsection (d) prohibits a person under the age of 19 years
from entering into a common law marriage. This provision
overrides existing case law that distinguished between common
law marriage and the requirement that the parents consent to the
marriage of their children who are under 18 years old. See, Adams
v. Boan, 559 So. 2d 1084 (Ala.1990).
Subsection (e) codifies the existing law that an individual
may be married to only one person at a time. Hampton v. State, 37
Ala. App. 427, 69 So.2d 727 (Ala. Civ. App. 1954). Bigamy is a
Class C felony in Alabama. Ala. Code Section 13A- 13-1.
Section 2.
Section two requires the Declaration of Common Law
Marriage form be developed by the Alabama Administrative
Office of Courts and enumerates what has to be included on the
form. Subsection (b) 4 is derived from Section 13A-13-3 of the
Code of Alabama. The form, accompanied with the proper
identification, is to be sworn to or affirmed by each party and
signed in the presence of a Notary Public.
Section 3.
This section enumerates which documents may be
presented to establish the age and identity of each party. The
27REAL ID Act of 2005, Pub. L. 109–13, 119 Stat. 302, enacted
May 11, 2005, is an Act of Congress that modified the United
States federal law pertaining to security, authentication, and
issuance procedures standards for state driver's licenses and
identification (ID) cards.
It is a Class A misdemeanor for anyone to knowingly
provide false, fraudulent or inaccurate proof a party’s age or
identity.
Section 4.
The clerk in the office of the judge of probate shall record
the Declaration of Common Law Marriage upon receipt of the
Declaration form and the verification of the age and identity of the
parties. The Declaration form and the proof of verification of the
age and identity of the parties must be presented in person by both
parties at the same time to the clerk. The documents provided to
establish proof of the age and identity of the parties is not recorded
in the probate office because of the personal information contained
in the documents. Upon recording of the Declaration, the clerk is
required to send a copy of the Declaration of Common Law
Marriage to the Office of Vital Statistics. The original Declaration
and the documents provided to the clerk to establish the age and
identity of the parties are to be returned to the parties by the clerk.
The fees charged for the recording of the Declaration are
for the same amount as for the issuance and recording of a
marriage license and disbursed in the same manner.
A properly executed and recorded Declaration provides
prima facie evidence of the existence of a common law marriage.
28Alabama Law Institute
Custody Amendments
January 2016
Chairman
Dean Noah Funderburg
ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Melanie Atha Judge Terry Moore
Judge William Bell Bryan Morgan
David Broome Judge Deborah Bell Paseur
Jennifer Bush Julia Smeds Roth
Amy Creech Judge Jimmy Sandlin
Judge Don Davis Stephen Shaw
Trey Dowdy Judge Paul Sherling
Robbie Lusk Judge Brenda Stedham
Bob Maddox Justice Lyn Stuart
Judge Alice Martin Col. Terry Travis
Randy Nichols Drew Whitmire
Jim Jeffries, Jr.
Stephen Johnson Ex Officio:
Representative Mike Jones Justice Mike Bolin
Sammye Kok Senator Cam Ward
Judge Philip Lisenby
2930PREFACE
The Alabama Law Institute presents to the Bench and Bar
of Alabama, for consideration and constructive criticism, the
following proposed act.
This act amends and expands the current statutory law
relating to joint custody to all custody arrangements. It abolishes
the concepts of one parent being awarded sole physical custody
and the other parent being awarded visitation. That concept is
replaced with the concept that if the parents are not awarded joint
physical custody, then one parent will have primary physical
custody and the other parent will be the non-residential custodial
parent or will have restricted physical custody.
Under existing law, both parents are required to submit a
parenting plan to the court only if they both seek joint physical
custody. Under this bill, both parents are required to submit
parenting plans in all custody cases. Moreover, if both parents
submit to the court the same parenting plan, that parenting plan
shall be granted in the final court order unless the court makes
specific findings as to why the parenting plan jointly submitted by
the parties should not granted.
The act enumerates the factors that the court shall consider
when determining whether to award joint physical custody.
Likewise, the act enumerates the factors to be used to determine
which parent shall be designated as the parent with primary
physical custody if joint custody is not awarded.
A new section provides additional remedies to a party when
a parent, without proper cause, fails to adhere to the time-sharing
schedule in a parenting plan. Make-up parenting time and
reimbursement for costs and attorney fees are among the remedies
available when a parent violates the time-sharing schedule in a
parenting plan.
This act was the result of a great deal of scholarly work by
a committee of judges, professors, and practitioners with extensive
backgrounds in this area of the law. The committee was chaired
by Dean Noah Funderburg and Penny Davis served the committee
as Reporter.
Othni J. Lathram
Director
January 2016
31Section 30-3-150
State policy. Joint Custody. It is the policy of this state to assure
that minor children have frequent and continuing contact with
parents who have shown the ability to act in the best interest of
their children and to encourage parents to share in the rights and
responsibilities of rearing their children after the parents have
separated or dissolved their marriage. Joint custody does not
necessarily mean equal physical custody.
Section 30-3-151
Definitions. For the purposes of this article the following words
shall have the following meanings:
(1) JOINT CUSTODY. Joint legal custody and joint
physical custody.
(2) JOINT LEGAL CUSTODY. Both parents have equal
rights and responsibilities for major decisions concerning the child,
including, but not limited to, the education of the child, health care,
and religious training. The court may designate one parent to have
sole power to make certain decisions while both parents retain
equal rights and responsibilities for other decisions. Both parents
have equal rights and responsibilities for major decisions
concerning the child, including, but not limited to, the education of
the child, health care, and religious training. This includes the
responsibility of both parents to discuss those decisions and
consider the wishes and concerns of each parent and the child. The
court may designate one parent to have tie-breaking authority to
make certain major decisions; however, that designation does not
32negate the responsibility of that parent to discuss those decisions
with the other parent and to consider the other parent's wishes and
concerns. In the event of an impasse and in the absence of an
express award of tie-breaking authority, the primary physical
custodian shall have tie-breaking authority for those decisions.
(3) JOINT PHYSICAL CUSTODY. Physical custody is
shared by the parents in a way that assures the child frequent and
substantial contact with each parent. Joint physical custody does
not necessarily mean physical custody of equal durations of time.
(4) NON-RESIDENTIAL CUSTODIAL PARENT. The
non-residential custodial parent is the parent with whom the child
does not live the majority of the time and who does not have the
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the primary authority and responsibility for the day-to-day care of a
child nor the authority to establish where a child will live.
non-residential custodial has the authority and responsibility for the day-to-day care of a
parent
child when the child is in his or her physical custody and not in the
physical custody of the parent with primary physical custody.
(5) PARENTING PLAN. A plan that specifies the time
which a minor child will spend with each parent.
(6) SOLE PRIMARY PHYSICAL CUSTODY.The parent
with primary physical custody has the primary authority and
responsibility for the day-to-day care of a child and establishes
where a child will live. One parent has sole physical custody and
the other parent has rights of visitation except as otherwise
provided by the court.
(7) RESTRICTED PHYSICAL CUSTODY. The court
restricts a parent’s physical access to a child by requiring
33supervised custody, no over-night custody, a suspension of
physical contact or any other restrictions on custody determined by
the court to be in the best interest of the child.
(8) SOLE LEGAL CUSTODY. One parent has sole rights
and responsibilities to make major decisions concerning the child,
including, but not limited to, the education of the child, health care,
and religious training.
Section 30-3-152
Factors considered; order without both parents' consent;
presumption where both parents request joint custody.
(a) The court shall in every case consider joint custody but
may award any form of custody which is determined to be in the
best interest of the child. In determining whether joint custody is in
the best interest of the child, the court shall consider the same
factors considered in awarding other forms of sole legal and
physical custody arrangements and all of the following factors
below. These factors are not listed in a specific order of
importance, and a court may weigh various factors differently
based on the facts presented and the best interests of the child.
(1) The agreement or lack of agreement of the
parents on joint custody.
(2) The past and present ability of the parents to
cooperate with each other and make decisions jointly.
(3) The ability of the parents to encourage the
sharing of love, affection, and contact between the child and the
other parent.
34(4) Any history of or potential for child abuse,
spouse abuse, or kidnapping.
(5) The geographic proximity of the parents to each
other as this relates to the practical considerations of joint physical
custody.
(b) The court may order a form of joint custody without the
consent of both parents, when it is in the best interest of the child.
(c) If both parents request joint custody, the presumption is
that joint custody is in the best interest of the child. Joint custody
shall be granted in the final order of the court unless the court
makes specific findings as to why joint custody is not granted.
(d) If joint custody is not awarded by the court, the
following factors shall be considered by the court when
determining which other custody arrangement is in the best interest
of the child. These factors are not listed in a specific order of
importance, and a court may weigh various factors differently
based on the facts presented and the best interests of the child.
(1) The relationship between each parent and the
child;
The relationship between the child, the child’s
peers, and siblings, or other relatives;
The capacity of each parent to provide a loving
relationship, and the needs of each child,
including their emotional, social, moral, material
and educational needs;
Each parent’s knowledge and familiarity with the
child and pre- and post-separation involvement
in the child’s life;
(2) (3) (4) 35(11) (5) The effect on the child of disrupting or
continuing an existing custodial status;
(6) Each parent’s home environment;
(7) (8) The preferences of the parents;
Moral, mental, and physical fitness of each
(9) (10) parent;
The child’s age and any special needs;
The preference of the child, if the child is of
sufficient age and maturity;
The history of cooperation between the parents,
including the past and present history, and the
capacity of each parent to facilitate or encourage
a continuing parent-child relationship with both
parents;
(12) Each parent’s criminal history or evidence of
violence, sexual, mental, or physical abuse;
(13) (14) Evidence of substance abuse by either parent;
The child’s current adjustment to or involvement
with his or her community;
(15) Military considerations;
(16) Characteristics of those seeking custody,
including age, character, stability, mental and
physical health;
(17) The report and recommendation of any expert
witnesses or other independent investigator; and
(18) Any other relevant factors.
36Section 30-3-153
Implementation; required provisions; plan set by court.
(a) In order to implement joint custody, The court shall
require the each parents to submit, separately or together, as part
of their agreement, provisions covering matters relevant to the care
and custody of the child, including, but not limited to, all of the
following:
(1) The care and education of the child.
(2) The medical and dental care of the child.
(3) Holidays and vacations.
(4) Child support.
(5) Other necessary factors that affect the physical or emotional
health and well-being of the child.
(1) (2) (3) How the parents will share and be responsible
for the daily tasks with the upbringing of the
child;
A parenting plan that specifies the time that the
minor child will spend with each parent;
A designation of who will be responsible for
any and all forms of health care, school-related
matters including the address to be used for
school residential determination and
(4) registration, and other activities;
Transportation arrangements for the child,
including who bears the cost for transporting the
child;
37(5) The methods and technologies that the parents
will use to communicate with the child and each
(6) other;
Any other matter specifically delineated by the
court.
(7) (8) The division of any expenses, in addition to
child support as provided by Rule 32 of the
Rules of Judicial Administration; and
A designation of the parent possessing primary
authority and responsibility regarding
involvement of the minor child in academic,
religious, civic, cultural, athletic, and other
activities, and in medical and dental care if the
parents are unable to agree on these decisions.
(b) If the parties are unable to reach an agreement as to the
provisions in subsection (a), the court shall set the plan.
(c) If both parents submit the same parenting plan, the
presumption is that the parenting plan jointly submitted by the
parents is in the best interest of the child. The parenting plan
jointly submitted by both parents shall be granted in the final order
of the court, unless the court makes specific findings as to why the
parenting plan jointly submitted by the parties is not granted.
Section 30-3-154
Availability of records to both parents.
Unless otherwise prohibited by court order or statute, all records
and information pertaining to the child, including, but not limited
to, medical, physiological, dental, scholastic, athletic,
38extracurricular, and law enforcement, shall be equally available to
both parents, in all types of custody arrangements.
Section 30-3-155
Determination of child support.
In making a determination of child support, the court shall apply
Rule 32 of the Alabama Rules of Judicial Administration.
Section 30-3-156
Interference with custody or violation of Chapter 3B.
The fact that joint custody has been awarded to both parents shall
not preclude a court from finding that one parent has committed
the crime of interference with custody as provided in Section 13A-
6-45, or has violated the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction and
Enforcement Act as provided in Chapter 3B of this title.
Section 30-3-157
Construction of article with respect to existing orders.
This article shall not be construed as grounds for modification of
an existing order. This article shall not be construed as affecting
the standard applicable to a subsequent modification.
Section 30-3-158. Remedies.
(a) When a parent refuses to adhere to the time-sharing
schedule in the parenting plan without proper cause, the court may:
After calculating the amount of time-
sharing improperly denied, award the parent denied time a
sufficient amount of extra time-sharing to compensate for the time-
(1) 39sharing missed, and such time-sharing shall be ordered as
expeditiously as possible in a manner consistent with the best
interests of the child and scheduled in a manner that is convenient
for the parent deprived of time-sharing. In ordering any makeup
time-sharing, the court shall schedule such time-sharing in a
manner that is consistent with the best interests of the child or
children and that is convenient for the non-offending parent and at
the expense of the noncompliant parent.
(2) Order the parent who did not provide time-
sharing or did not properly exercise time-sharing under the time-
sharing schedule to pay reasonable court costs and attorney's fees
incurred by the non-offending parent to enforce the time-sharing
schedule.
(3) Order the parent who did not provide time-
sharing or did not properly exercise time-sharing under the time-
sharing schedule to attend a parenting course approved by the
court.
(4) Order the parent who did not provide time-
sharing or did not properly exercise time-sharing under the time-
sharing schedule to pay the actual cost incurred by the other parent
because of the failure to provide time-sharing or the failure to
properly exercise time sharing as provided by the court order.
(5) May impose any other reasonable remedies as a
result of noncompliance.
(b) These remedies are in addition to existing remedies,
including, but not limited to, contempt.
40Alabama Commentary
Section 30-3-151
Three new definitions were added to this section; restricted
physical custody, non-residential custodial parent and parenting
plans. The definition of “sole physical custody” was modified to
“primary physical custody” which is consistent with the language
frequently used in cases to reflect the desire to move away from
the concept of one parent having sole physical custody and the
other parent having only “visitation rights” with their child.
If joint physical custody is not awarded, the parent given
primary physical custody will have primary authority and
responsibilities for the day-to-day care of the child and will
determine where the child resides. The other parent will be the
non-residential custodial parent unless the court determines to
award the other parent restricted physical custody.
The non-residential custodial parent has the responsibility
for the day-to-day care of the child when the child is in his or her
custody. Typically, restricted physical custody will be awarded by
a court in situations when restricted visitation is required out of
concern for the safety or well-being of the child or when the parent
has limited parenting skills
The parenting plan is a plan which specifies when the child
is with each parent. Section 30-3-153 contains the provisions
relating to parenting plans.
Section 30-3-152
Subsection (d) is added and provides the factors for the
court to utilize when determining which custody arrangement is
best for the child if joint custody is not going to be awarded by the
court. Many of these factors are listed in current law. See for
example, Ex Parte Devine, 398 So.2d 686 (Ala.1981).
Section 30-3-153
Subsection (a) is amended to require each parent to submit
a parenting plan to the court in each custody case. This differs
from the current law that only requires a plan to be submitted when
the parties request joint custody. The specifics of what must be
included in the plan were developed from the requirements for
41parenting plans in other states, but primarily from the State of
Florida.
If the parents are unable to reach an agreement on the
parenting plans, the court will establish the plan. If both parties
agree on a parenting plan, the presumption is that the parents’ plan
should be granted by the court unless the court makes specific
findings as to why the parents’ plan should not be granted by the
court.
Section 30-3-158
This new section provides additional remedies to a party
when a parent, without proper cause, fails to adhere to the time-
sharing schedule in a parenting plan. Make-up parenting time and
reimbursement for costs and attorney fees are among the remedies
available when a parent violates the time-sharing schedule in a
parenting plan. These remedies are similar to those provided under
Florida law.
42Alabama Law Institute
Grandparent Visitation Act
January 2016
Chairman
Dean Noah Funderburg
ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Melanie Atha Judge Terry Moore
Judge William Bell Judge Deborah Bell Paseur
David Broome Julia Smeds Roth
Jennifer Bush Judge Jimmy Sandlin
Amy Creech Stephen Shaw
Judge Don Davis Judge Paul Sherling
Robbie Lusk Judge Brenda Stedham
Bob Maddox Justice Lyn Stuart
Judge Alice Martin Drew Whitmire
Randy Nichols
Jim Jeffries, Jr. Ex Officio:
Stephen Johnson Justice Mike Bolin
Representative Mike Jones Senator Cam Ward
Sammye Kok
Judge Philip Lisenby
4344PREFACE
The Alabama Law Institute presents to the Bench and Bar
of Alabama, for consideration and constructive criticism, the
following proposed act.
Under common law, grandparents did not have any legal
rights to court-ordered visitation with their grandchildren over the
objection of the parents of the grandchild. Thus, grandparent
visitation has been authorized by legislative enactment.
In 2011, Alabama's current grandparent visitation statute
was declared unconstitutional in Ex parte E.R.G., 73 So.3d 634
(Ala. 2011), based in part on Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 120
S.Ct. 2054, 147 L.Ed.2d 49 (2000). This act has been drafted to
meet the constitutional requirements the court determined to be
lacking in the existing statute by providing for a rebuttable
presumption that a fit parent's decision denying or limiting
visitation to the petitioner is in the best interest of the child. This
act is based on an Arkansas law previously held by the Arkansas
courts to meet the Troxel requirements.
Moreover, in this act Alabama has chosen to use the
enhanced standard of clear and convincing evidence, rather than
the preponderance of the evidence standard embraced by the
Arkansas statute.
To rebut the decision of the parent to deny visitation the
grandparent must prove by clear and convincing evidence, both of
the following: the grandparent has a significant and viable
relationship with the grandchild and visitation with the grandparent
is in the best interest of the grandchild.
Courts may grant temporary visitation pending a final order
under limited circumstances. Also, the court has the discretion to
award any party reasonable expenses incurred by or on behalf of
the party.
This act repeals the exiting statute, Section 30-3-4.1 of the
Code of Alabama 1975.
45This act was the result of a great deal of scholarly work by
a committee of judges, professors, and practitioners with extensive
backgrounds in this area of the law. The committee was chaired
by Dean Noah Funderburg and Penny Davis served the committee
as Reporter.
Othni J. Lathram
Director
January 2016
46GRANDPARENT VISITATION ACT
Section 1. (a) For the purposes of this section, the following
words have the following meanings:
(1) GRANDPARENT. The parent of a parent, whether
the relationship is created biologically or by adoption.
(2) HARM. A finding by the court, by clear and
convincing evidence, that without court-ordered visitation by the
grandparent, the child's emotional, mental, or physical well-being has
been, could reasonably be, or would be jeopardized.
(b) A grandparent may file an original action in a circuit court
where the child resides, or any other court exercising jurisdiction with
respect to his or her grandchild, or file a motion to intervene in any
action when any court in this state has before it any issue concerning
custody of his or her grandchild, including a domestic relations
proceeding involving the parent or parents of the grandchild, for
reasonable visitation rights with respect to his or her grandchild under
this section if any of the following circumstances exist:
(1) An action for a divorce or legal separation of the
parents has been filed, or the marital relationship between the parents
of the child has been severed by death or divorce.
(2) The child was born out of wedlock and the
petitioner is a maternal grandparent of the child.
47(3) The child was born out of wedlock, the petitioner is
a paternal grandparent of the child, and paternity has been legally
established.
(4) An action to terminate the parental rights of a parent
or parents has been filed, or the parental rights of a parent has been
terminated by court order; provided, however, the right of the
grandparent to seek visitation terminates if the court approves a
petition for adoption by an adoptive parent, unless such visitation
rights are allowed pursuant to Section 26-10A-30, Code of Alabama
1975.
(c) (1) There is a rebuttable presumption that a fit parent's
decision to deny or limit visitation to the petitioner is in the best
interest of the child.
(2) To rebut the presumption, the petitioner shall prove
by clear and convincing evidence, both of the following:
a. The petitioner has established a significant
and viable relationship with the child for whom he or she is requesting
visitation; and
b. Visitation with the petitioner is in the best
interest of the child.
(d) To establish a significant and viable relationship with the
child, the petitioner shall prove by clear and convincing evidence either
of the following:
48(1) a. The child resided with the petitioner for at least
six consecutive months with or without a parent present;
b. The petitioner was the caregiver to the child
on a regular basis for at least six consecutive months; or
c. The petitioner had frequent or regular contact
with the child for at least 12 consecutive months that resulted in a
strong and meaningful relationship with the child.
(2) Any other facts that establish that the loss of the
relationship between the petitioner and the child is likely to harm the
child.
(e) To establish that visitation with the petitioner is in the best
interest of the child, the petitioner shall prove by clear and convincing
evidence all of the following:
(1) That the petitioner has the capacity to give the child
love, affection, and guidance.
(2) That the loss of an opportunity to maintain a
significant and viable relationship between the petitioner and the child
has caused or is reasonably likely to cause harm to the child.
(3) That the petitioner is willing to cooperate with the
parent or parents if visitation with the child is allowed.
(f) The court shall make specific written findings of fact in
support of its rulings.
(g) (1) No grandparent or grandparents who are married to
each other may file a petition seeking an order for visitation more than
49once every 24 months absent a showing of good cause. The fact that a
grandparent or grandparents who are married to each other have
petitioned for visitation shall not preclude another grandparent from
subsequently petitioning for visitation within the 24-month period.
After an order for grandparent visitation has been granted, the parent,
guardian, or legal custodian of the child may file a petition requesting
the court to modify or terminate a grandparent's visitation time with a
grandchild.
(2) The court may modify or terminate visitation upon
proof that a material change in circumstances has occurred since the
award of grandparent visitation was made, and a finding by the court
that the modification or termination of the grandparent visitation rights
is in the best interest of the child.
(h) The court may award any party reasonable expenses
incurred by or on behalf of the party, including costs, communication
expenses, attorney's fees, guardian ad litem fees, investigative fees,
expenses for court-appointed witnesses, travel expenses, and child
care during the course of the proceedings.
(i) (1) Notwithstanding any provisions of this act to the
contrary, a petition filed by a grandparent, having standing under
Chapter 10A of Title 26 of the Code of Alabama, seeking visitation
shall be filed in probate court and is governed by Section 26-10A-30,
Code of Alabama 1975, rather than by this act if either of the following
circumstances exists:
50a. The grandchild has been the subject of an
adoption proceeding other than the one creating the grandparent
relationship; or
b. The grandchild is the subject of a pending
adoption proceeding or a finalized adoption proceeding.
(2) Notwithstanding any provisions of this act to the
contrary, any grandparent seeking visitation pursuant to Section 12-
15-314, Code of Alabama 1975, shall be governed by Section 12-15-
314, Code of Alabama 1975, rather than by this act.
(3) Notwithstanding any provisions of this act to the
contrary, a parent of a parent, whose parental rights have been
terminated by court order in which the petitioner was the Department
of Human Resources, shall not be awarded any visitation rights
pursuant to this act.
(j) The right of a grandparent to maintain visitation rights
pursuant to this section terminates upon the adoption of the child
except as provided by Section 26-10A-30 of the Code of Alabama
1975.
(k) All of the following are necessary parties to any action filed
under this act:
(1) Unless parental rights have been terminated, the
parent or parents of the child.
(2) Every other person who has been awarded custody
or visitation with the child pursuant to court order.
51(3) Any agency having custody of the child pursuant to
court order.
(1) In addition, upon filing of the action, notice shall be given
to all other grandparents of the child as herein defined. The petition
shall affirmatively state the name and address upon whom notice has
been given.
(m) Service and notice shall be made in the following manner:
(1) Service of process on necessary parties shall be made
in accordance with the Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure.
(2) As to any other person to whom notice is required to
be given under subsection (1), notice shall be given by first class mail
to the last known address of the person or persons entitled to notice.
Notice shall be effective on the third day following mailing.
(n) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the notice requirements
provided by this act may be limited or waived by the court to the
extent necessary to protect the confidentiality and the health, safety, or
liberty of a person or a child.
(o) Upon filing an action under this section, after giving special
weight to the fundamental right of a fit parent to decide which
associations are in the best interest of his or her child, the court may
enter a pendente lite order granting temporary visitation rights to a
grandparent, pending a final order, if the court determines from the
evidence presented at a hearing that visitation would be in the best
interest of the child and one of the following circumstances exist:
52(1) the child resided with the grandparent for at least six
consecutive months;
(2) the grandparent was the caregiver of the child on a
regular basis for at least six consecutive months;
(3) the grandparent provided significant financial
support for the child for at least six consecutive months; or
(4) the grandparent had frequent or regular contact with
the child for at least 12 consecutive months.
Section 2. As a matter of public policy this act recognizes the
importance of family and the fundamental rights of parents and
children. In the context of grandparent visitation under this section of
the Code of Alabama, a fit parent’s decision regarding whether to
permit grandparent visitation is entitled to special weight due to a
parent’s fundamental right to make decisions concerning the rearing of
his or her child. Nonetheless, a parent’s interest in a child must be
balanced against the states’ long-recognized interests as parens patriae.
Thus, as applied to grandparent visitation under this section, this act
balances the constitutional rights of parents and children by imposing
an enhanced standard of review and consideration of the harm to a
child caused by the parent’s limitation or termination of a prior
relationship of a child to his or her grandparent.
Section 3. Section 30-3-4.1 of the Code of Alabama 1975, is
repealed.
53Section 4. The provisions of this act are severable. If any part of
this act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, that declaration shall not
affect the part which remains.
Section 5. This act shall become effective immediately
following its passage and approval by the Governor, or its otherwise
becoming law.
ALABAMA COMMENT
Under common law, grandparents did not have any legal
rights to court-ordered visitation with their grandchildren over the
objection of the parents of the grandchild.
"Unlike parents, grandparents had no rights in
regard to their grandchildren at common law.
'Under common law principles, grandparents lacked
any legal right to visitation and communication with
the grandchildren if such visitation was forbidden
by the parents.' Ex parte Bronstein, 434 So. 2d 780,
782 (Ala.1983). Therefore, the rights of
grandparents to visitation with their grandchildren
exist only as created by the Act; they are purely
statutory." Ex parte E.R.G., 73 So. 3d 634, 646
(Ala. 2011).
While the Legislature clearly has the authority to alter or
repeal the common law, it must do so in a manner consistent with
the U.S. Constitution and Alabama Constitution. See Ala. Code §
1-3-1 (1975); Ex parte E.R.G., 73 So. 3d 634, 646 (Ala. 2011).
In Troxel, the court determined that "the court must accord
at least some special weight to the parent's own determination" in
decisions concerning grandparent visitation. Troxel v. Granville,
530 U.S. 57, 71, 120 S. Ct. 2054, 2062, 147 L.Ed.2d 49, 59 (2000).
In E.R.G., the court stated, "In order for a grandparent-visitation
statute to pass constitutional muster, it must recognize the
fundamental presumption in favor of the rights of the parents." Ex
parte E.R.G., 73 So. 3d 634, 646 (Ala. 2011).
54This Act is derived primarily from Arkansas' grandparent
visitation statute. Ark. Code § 9-13-103 (1987). The Arkansas
statute has been held by the Arkansas Supreme Court as complying
with Troxel.
"After reviewing the history of Arkansas's
grandparent-visitation statute, this court observed
that our statute 'gives the parent's decision
presumptive or special weight in deciding whether
grandparent visitation is in the best interest of the
child' as required by the Supreme Court's decision
in Troxel v. Granville and our decision in Linder v.
Linder." In re Adoption of J.P., 2011 Ark. 535, 14,
385 S.W.3d 266, 275 (Ark. 2011) (internal citations
omitted).
Nonetheless, Alabama chose to further protect the
fundamental rights of parents to make decisions concerning the
care, custody, and control of their children by implementing the
enhanced standard of clear and convincing evidence rather than the
preponderance of the evidence standard embraced by the Arkansas
statute.
Subsection (a) (1) defines "grandparent" for purposes of
this act. Once an adoption has occurred the law creates a new legal
relationship within the family. Consequently, the adoptive parents
become the legal parents of the adoptee and the parents of the
adopting parents become the new legal grandparents of the adopted
child. Except when Chapter 10A of Title 26 or Chapter 15 of Title
12 of the Code of Alabama apply, these sections covers
grandparent visitation rights. Chapter 10A of Title 26 of the Code
of Alabama governs the visitation rights of a natural grandparent
whose grandchild has been adopted or who is the subject of a
pending adoption petition by certain relatives or by a stepparent.
Thus, for example, a post-adoption petition for visitation by the
natural grandparent of a grandchild that was adopted by a step-
parent would be governed by the Adoption Code. Chapter 15 of
Title 12 of the Code of Alabama gives juvenile court original
jurisdiction over certain grandparent visitation cases.
55Subsection (a)(2) was derived from the Oklahoma
grandparent statute. Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 43, § 109.4(E) (2) (2001).
The Arkansas grandparent statute does not contain a definition of
"harm." Thus, this definition was added to ensure the consideration
of harm to the child in the absence of court-ordered visitation
would include the emotional and mental harm to the child in
addition the physical well-being of the child.
Subsection (b) was derived partially from Arkansas'
grandparent visitation statute and partially from current law. Ark.
Code § 9-13-103(b) (1987) and Ala. Code § 30-3-4.1.
The act continues the current practice of allowing the
grandparents to intervene in certain actions involving a grandchild.
See, Ala. Code § 30-3-4.1(c). This will allow a court which has
proper jurisdiction to resolve grandparent visitation issues and
consequently will allow the child to avoid being subjected to a
multiplicity of cases that might otherwise be required if only the
circuit court had jurisdiction.
In subsections (b) (2) and (3) the words "was born out of
wedlock" were substituted for the words "is illegitimate" in
keeping with the language in existing Alabama statutory law. Ala.
Code § 30-3-4.1 (1975). Alabama modified subsection (b) (3)
from paternity being established "by a court of competent
jurisdiction" to paternity that "has been legally established." This
change was made to reflect that generally, under the Alabama
Uniform Parentage Act, a properly filed valid acknowledgement of
paternity shall be considered a legal finding of paternity of a child.
Ala. Code § 26-17-305 (1975).
Subsection (c) has been drafted so that this act meets the
constitutional requirements the court determined to be lacking in
the existing statute by providing for a rebuttable presumption that a
fit parent's decision denying or limiting visitation to the petitioner
is in the best interest of the child. In 2011, the Alabama
grandparent visitation statute was declared unconstitutional in Ex
parte E.R.G., 73 So.3d 634 (Ala. 2011), based in part on the
rationale in a U.S. Supreme Court decision overturning a
Washington state grandparent statute, Troxel v. Granville, 530
U.S. 57, 120 S.Ct. 2054, 147 L.Ed.2d 49 (2000). In Troxel, the
56U.S. Supreme Court acknowledged that the constitutionality of any
standard for awarding visitation is determined by the application of
the standard on a case-by-case bases.
"We do not, and need not, define today the
precise scope of the parental due process right in the
visitation context. In this respect, we agree with
Justice KENNEDY that the constitutionality of any
standard for awarding visitation turns on the
specific manner in which that standard is applied
and that the constitutional protections in this area
are best 'elaborated with care.' Post, at 2079
(dissenting opinion). Because much state-court
adjudication in this context occurs on a case-by-
case basis, we would be hesitant to hold that
specific nonparental visitation statutes violate the
Due Process Clause as a per se matter. See, e.g.,
Fairbanks v. McCarter, 330 Md. 39, 49-50, 622
A.2d 121, 126-127 (1993) (interpreting best-interest
standard in grandparent visitation statute normally
to require court's consideration of certain factors);
Williams v. Williams, 256 Va. 19, 501 S.E.2d 417,
418 (1998) (interpreting Virginia nonparental
visitation statute to require finding of harm as
condition precedent to awarding visitation)." Troxel
v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 73-74, 120 S.Ct. 2054,
2064, 147 L.Ed.2d 49, 61-62 (2000).
Subsection (c) was derived primarily from Arkansas'
grandparent visitation statute. Ark. Code § 9-13-103(c) (1987).
Alabama's statute does not include great-grandparent visitation as
does the Arkansas statute. More importantly, throughout the entire
act, Alabama has chosen to use the enhanced standard of clear and
convincing evidence, rather than the preponderance of the
evidence standard embraced by the Arkansas statute. In subsection
(c) (1), Alabama substituted the words "fit parent's" for
"custodian's" decision, thus paralleling the determination by the
United States Supreme Court that there is a legal presumption that
a "fit parent" acts in the child's best interest.
57"The substantive fundamental right of parents to
make decisions regarding the 'care, custody, and
control' of their children is premised on the legal
presumption that fit parents act in the best interests
of their children: '[T]here is a presumption that fit
parents act in the best interests of their children.' Ex
parte E.R.G., 73 So. 3d 634, 644 (Ala. 2011)
(quoting Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 68, 120
S.Ct. 2054, 2061, 147 L.Ed.2d 49, 58 (2000)).
Subsection (d) was derived primarily from Arkansas'
grandparent visitation statute. Ark. Code § 9-13-103(d) (1987).
Alabama has chosen to use the enhanced standard of clear and
convincing evidence, rather than the preponderance of the
evidence standard embraced by the Arkansas statute. Also, in
subsection (d) (1), Alabama has substituted "a parent" for the
language "the current custodian" in the Arkansas statute.
Subsection (e) was derived primarily from Arkansas'
grandparent visitation statute. Ark. Code § 9-13-103(e) (1987).
Alabama has chosen to use the enhanced standard of clear and
convincing evidence, rather than the preponderance of the
evidence standard embraced by the Arkansas statute. The words
"all of" were added before the words "the following" to make it
clear that all three elements must be met in order to establish that
visitation with the petitioner is in the best interest of the child.
Subsection (e) (2) has also been modified to clarify that the
relationship between the petitioner and child must have been
"significant and viable." Moreover, the petitioner must prove that
the loss of that relationship either has caused or is reasonably
likely to cause harm to the child if visitation is not permitted.
Although Troxel did not specifically require a finding of
"harm or potential harm to the child as a condition precedent to
granting visitation," Alabama has chosen to include the element of
harm when determining the best interest of the child.
"Because we rest our decision on the sweeping
breadth of § 26.10.160(3) and the application of that
broad, unlimited power in this case, we do not
consider the primary constitutional question passed
58on by the Washington Supreme Court-whether the
Due Process Clause requires all nonparental
visitation statutes to include a showing of harm or
potential harm to the child as a condition precedent
to granting visitation. We do not, and need not,
define today the precise scope of the parental due
process right in the visitation context. In this
respect, we agree with Justice KENNEDY that the
constitutionality of any standard for awarding
visitation turns on the specific manner in which that
standard is applied and that the constitutional
protections in this area are best 'elaborated with
care.' Post, at 2079 (dissenting opinion). Because
much state-court adjudication in this context occurs
on a case-by-case basis, we would be hesitant to
hold that specific nonparental visitation statutes
violate the Due Process Clause as a per se matter.
See, e.g., Fairbanks v. McCarter, 330 Md. 39, 49-
50, 622 A.2d 121, 126-127 (1993) (interpreting
best-interest standard in grandparent visitation
statute normally to require court's consideration of
certain factors); Williams v. Williams, 256 Va. 19,
501 S.E.2d 417, 418 (1998) (interpreting Virginia
nonparental visitation statute to require finding of
harm as condition precedent to awarding
visitation)." Ex parte E.R.G., 73 So. 3d 634, 674-75
(Ala. 2011) (Bolin, J., concurring in the result)
(quoting Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 73-74,
120 S.Ct. 2054, 2064, 147 L.Ed.2d 49, 61-62 (2000)
(footnote omitted)).
Also, Alabama has substituted "parent or parents" for
"custodian" in subsection (e) (3).
Subsection (f) retains the requirement that a court make a
specific written finding of facts that is contained in the existing
Alabama grandparent statute. Ala. Code § 30-3-4.1(e) (1975).
Subsection (g) is very similar to the existing Alabama
grandparent statute at Ala. Code § 30-3-4.1 (e) (1975). However,
the subsection was modified to include language to ensure that
59married grandparents would not be able to file separate actions in a
manner to get two independent opportunities to seek visitation.
Nonetheless, a grandparent who is not married to a grandparent
who has sought visitation within a 24 month period is not
precluded from seeking visitation for himself or herself.
Modification or termination of visitations rights may only occur
upon proof of both a material change in circumstances since the
issuance of the visitation order and a finding that the modification
or termination would be in the best interest of the child. This
provision has been added to limit unwarranted successive litigation
and to provide stability in the child's life.
Subsection (h) addresses the issue of awarding of costs,
fees, and expenses in a manner consistent with similar provisions
of Alabama's enactment of the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction
Enforcement Act (UCCJEA). Ala. Code §§ 30-3B-208, 30-3B-312
(1975). Under this subsection, the awarding of costs, fees, and
expenses are discretionary with the court. Any party, rather than
just the prevailing party, may petition for an award of costs, fees,
and expenses. Since there are some cases in which different parties
may prevail on some of the issues being litigated, it was
determined that the wording to this subsection would allow the
court to make an award to either party as deemed appropriate by
the court.
Subsections (i) and (j) clarify the interaction of this act with
Alabama's separate provision in the Alabama Adoption Code that
governs a natural grandparent's opportunity to seek visitation rights
with an adoptee who is being adopted or has been adopted. Ala.
Code § 26-10A-30 (1975). Subsequent to Troxel, the
constitutionality of § 26 -10A-30 of the Code of Alabama was
challenged. The court distinguished the facts of the case from
Troxel because it involved "the rights of adopting parents in the
limited context of intrafamily adoptions" and upheld its
constitutionality in Ex parte D.W., 835 So. 2d 186,189 (Ala. 2002);
see also Ex parte A.S. and C.S., 91 So. 3d 656 (Ala. 2011) (Bolin,
J., concurring specially). The Adoption Code provides that a
natural grandparent may seek visitation rights in the limited
situations when the adoptee is or has been adopted by a stepparent
or certain relatives. The court hearing all of the evidence
surrounding the adoption of the child is in the best position to
60determine whether visitation rights should be granted. Thus, this
Act does not apply in those situations. Subsection (i) provides that
Title 12 governs grandparents who seek visitation with a
“dependent child”.
Subsection (k) list the necessary parties to any action filed
under this act. Subsection (l) requires notice be given to all other
grandparents who are not otherwise parties under subsection (k).
Subsection (m) provides for the manner of notice and service.
Subsection (n) incorporates the protection notice disclosure
exception in the Alabama Parent-Child Relationship Protection Act
(Relocation Act). Ala. Code § 30-3-167(a)(2) (1975). The addition
of the words "or limited" reflects that the court may be able to give
limited notice and, for example, still protect the identifying
information of persons at risk from the effect of domestic violence
or abuse.
Subsection (o) enumerates the requirements that must be
met before the court can enter a pendent lite order granting
temporary visitation rights to grandparents under this act.
Generally, courts are given authority to issue temporary orders
relating to custody and visitation with children pending a final
order. Ala. Code § 30-2-8.1 (1975). See also T.J.H. v. S.N.F., 960
So. 2d 669 (Ala. Civ. App. 2006); Ex parte Bamberg, 580 So. 2d
1363 (Ala. Civ. App. 1991). However, because of the
"fundamental right of parents to make decisions concerning the
care, custody, and control of their children," Troxel v. Granville,
530 U.S. 57, 66, 120 S.Ct. 2054, 2060, 147 L.Ed.2d 49, 57 (2000),
there are limitations imposed on the courts issuing temporary
orders relating to court-ordered visitation of a child with a
grandparent over the objection of a fit parent. The court must first
give special weight to the fundamental right of a fit parent to
decide which associations are in the best interest of his or her
child. Second, the court must determine if it is in the best interest
of the child to order temporary visitation. Finally, there must be
one of the enumerated relationships between the grandparent and
grandchild.
6162Alabama Law Institute
Division of Retirement Benefits
Upon Divorce Act
January 2016
Chairman
Dean Noah Funderburg
ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Melanie Atha Judge Terry Moore
Judge William Bell Bryan Morgan
David Broome Judge Deborah Bell Paseur
Jennifer Bush Julia Smeds Roth
Amy Creech Judge Jimmy Sandlin
Judge Don Davis Stephen Shaw
Trey Dowdy Judge Paul Sherling
Robbie Lusk Judge Brenda Stedham
Bob Maddox Justice Lyn Stuart
Judge Alice Martin Col. Terry Travis
Randy Nichols Drew Whitmire
Jim Jeffries, Jr.
Stephen Johnson Ex Officio:
Representative Mike Jones Justice Mike Bolin
Sammye Kok Senator Cam Ward
Judge Philip Lisenby
6364PREFACE
The Alabama Law Institute presents to the Bench and Bar
of Alabama, for consideration and constructive criticism, the
following proposed act.
This bill is drafted by the Standing Family Law Committee
of the Alabama Law Institute. Section 30-2-51 of the Code of
Alabama, concerning the division of retirement benefits upon
divorce, is significantly amended. The court retains the discretion
to award retirement benefits to the non-employed spouse within
certain limitations. The act retains the limitation that precluded the
court from awarding more than 50% of the non-employed spouse's
retirement benefits accrued during the marriage. However, the act
eliminated the threshold requirements that the parties must be
married for at least 10 years before the court could consider
awarding retirement benefits.
The bill grants the court broad discretion to use any
equitable method of valuing, dividing and distribution of the
benefits. It eliminated the costly requirement of providing
evidence of the present value of the retirement benefits in all cases.
Subsection (d) provides a more equitable result by requiring that
each party equally bear the burden or benefit of the passive
appreciation or depreciation of the retirement benefits during the
time between the award of the benefits and their distribution.
Finally, the court is given the authority to enter orders to
protect and preserve the interest of either spouse in the retirement
benefits.
This act was the result of a great deal of scholarly work by
a committee of judges, professors, and practitioners with extensive
backgrounds in this area of the law. The committee was chaired
by Dean Noah Funderburg and Penny Davis served the committee
as Reporter.
Othni J. Lathram
Director
January 2016
6566A BILL
TO BE ENTITLED
AN ACT
To amend Section 30-2-51, Code of Alabama 1975, relating to
allowance upon divorce of certain retirement benefits; to provide
further for the circumstances in which the court may make an
allowance; and to provide further for the valuation of retirement
benefits; and to provide for the obligations of each party.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1. Section 30-2-51, Code of Alabama 1975, is amended to
read as follows:
§30-2-51.
(a) If either spouse has no separate estate or if it is
insufficient for the maintenance of a spouse, the judge, upon
granting a divorce, at his or her discretion, may order to a spouse
an allowance out of the estate of the other spouse, taking into
consideration the value thereof and the condition of the spouse's
family. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the judge may not take into
consideration any property acquired prior to the marriage of the
parties or by inheritance or gift unless the judge finds from the
evidence that the property, or income produced by the property,
has been used regularly for the common benefit of the parties
during their marriage.
(b) The judge, at his or her discretion, may include in the
estate of either spouse the present value of any future or current
67retirement benefits, that a spouse may have a vested interest in or
may be receiving on the date the action for divorce is filed,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) The parties have been married for a period of 10
years during which the retirement was being
accumulated.
(2) The court shall not include in the estate the
value of any retirement benefits acquired prior to
the marriage including any interest or appreciation
of the benefits.
(3) The total amount of the retirement benefits
payable to the non-covered spouse shall not exceed
50 percent of the retirement benefits that may be
considered by the court.
(c) If the court finds in its discretion that any of the covered
spouse's retirement benefits should be distributed to the non-
covered spouse, the amount is not payable to the non-covered
spouse until the covered spouse begins to receive his or her
retirement benefits or reaches the age of 65 years, unless both
parties agree to a lump sum settlement of the non-covered spouse's
benefits payable in one or more installments.
(b) The marital estate is subject to equitable division and
distribution. Unless the parties agree otherwise, and except as
otherwise provided by federal or state law, the marital estate
includes any interest, whether vested or unvested, either spouse has
acquired, received, accumulated, or earned during the marriage in
68any and all individual, joint, or group retirement benefits including,
but not limited to, any retirement plans, retirement accounts,
pensions, profit-sharing plans, savings plans, stock option plans,
annuities, or other similar benefit plans from any kind of
employment, including, but not limited to, self employment, public
or private employment, and military employment.
(1) Notwithstanding the foregoing, unless the
parties agree otherwise, the total amount of the
retirement benefits payable to the noncovered
spouse shall not exceed 50 percent of the retirement
benefits that may be considered by the court.
(2) Any party asserting that all or a portion of his or
her interest in any retirement benefits is excluded
from the marital estate shall bear the burden of
proving that fact and the value or amount of the
excluded interest, including any active or passive
income or appreciation on that interest.
(c) The court may use any method of valuing, dividing, and
distributing an interest in retirement benefits that is equitable under
the circumstances of the case so long as the overall division and
distribution of the marital property remains equitable to the parties.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a court to
divide or distribute any amount, or any percentage, of one spouse's
retirement benefits to the other spouse.
69(d) Any passive increase or loss in the value of retirement
benefits from the effective date of the award to the date of
distribution shall accrue to, or be borne by, the parties on a pro rata
basis.
(e) Unless otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, a
court may enter any order designed to protect or preserve the legal
interest of either spouse in retirement benefits, including any order
to prevent, or to compensate a spouse for, the deprivation or
dissipation of a legal share of any retirement benefits due to the act
or omission of the other spouse and any order necessary to enforce
the property division of such benefits. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a court may not enter any order modifying the terms of
any retirement benefits or enlarging the benefits payable under the
terms of a retirement plan.
Section 2. This act shall become effective on January 1, 2017,
following its passage and approval by the Governor, or its
otherwise becoming law.
Alabama Comment
Section 30-2-51(b) governs the equitable division and
distribution in divorce cases of retirement benefits which, under Ex
parte Vaughn, 634 So.2d 533 (Ala. 1993), and similar cases, are
considered marital property. The statute preserves prior statutory
law by retaining the limitation on the award to the non-covered
spouse of no more than 50 percent of each spouse's interest in any
retirement plan or retirement account acquired during the marriage.
See 1995 Ala. Acts No. 95-549. However, this act changes prior
law by eliminating the requirement that the marriage last at least
10 years in order for retirement benefits to be included in the
70marital estate and by including nonvested, as well as vested,
retirement benefits in the marital estate in order to conform
Alabama law to the law in other American jurisdictions. See 2
Brett Turner, Equitable Distribution of Property, § 6:22 (3d ed.).
The retirement benefits listed in the statute are intended to be
illustrative only with the intent that any type of retirement benefits
should be included in the marital estate unless expressly excluded
by federal or state law. Other examples of retirement benefits that
are included are an IRA, a SEP IRA, a 401(k) plan and other
similar plans. See Uniform Services Former Spouses' Protection
Act, 10 U.S.C. § 1408 (excluding certain federal military
retirement benefits from equitable division under state law).
However, it is not intended that the amendments to this statute will
be applied to benefits paid or payable for reasons unrelated to the
retirement of a spouse even if the benefits are of a type listed in the
statute or these comments.
Section 30-2-51(b)(3) further changes prior statutory law
by placing the burden of proof on the spouse seeking to exclude his
or her interest, or some portion of that interest, in a retirement plan
or retirement account from the marital estate, also to be consistent
with the rule prevailing in other American jurisdictions. See 2
Brett Turner, Equitable Distribution of Property, § 6:24 (3d ed.).
For example, when a spouse claims that part of his or her interest
in a defined-benefit retirement plan accrued before the marriage,
the burden rests on that spouse to prove the number of years of
creditable service accruing prior to the marriage; absent such
proof, the court shall presume that the entire interest accrued
during the marriage. The statute intentionally fails to define the
term "during the marriage," leaving it to the court to decide based
on the evidence and equitable considerations the appropriate
starting and ending date of the marriage for all purposes under the
statute.
Section 30-2-51(c) authorizes a court to use any equitable
method of valuing, dividing, and distributing an interest in
retirement benefits when making an overall equitable division of
the marital estate. For example, a court may use an immediate
offset method by determining the present value of the retirement
benefits based on actuarial probabilities and awarding a non-
covered spouse his or her marital share of the benefits in an
71immediate lump sum award of cash or property. Using this
method, the court does not divide or distribute the retirement
benefits themselves, which is permissible under the second
sentence of § 30-2-51(c). On the other hand, a court may use a
deferred distribution method by which the court awards a non-
covered spouse a stated percentage of the retirement benefits
payable when the covered spouse becomes fully eligible for receipt
of those benefits under the terms of the retirement plan. In this
example, the court does not determine the present value of the
covered spouse's interest in the retirement plan. By authorizing
such a division and distribution, subsection 30-2-51(c) deviates
from prior statutory law which required evidence of present value
in all cases in order for retirement benefits to be considered when a
court divided marital property. See, e.g., Brattmiller v. Brattmiller,
975 So. 2d 359 (Ala. Civ. App. 2007).
Section 30-2-51(d) provides that the parties shall bear the
passive appreciation or depreciation of an interest in retirement
benefits in proportion to their basis in that interest as provided in
the property settlement. By using the word "passive," the statute
contemplates increases or decreases in value such as from
fluctuations in investment markets and cost-of-living adjustments
made pursuant to the retirement plans as distinguished from active
appreciation such as from continued service or actual monetary
contributions and active loss from withdrawals or elections which
diminish the value of the retirement benefits, which actions should
not affect the property settlement.
Section 30-2-51(e) authorizes a court to enter such orders
as are necessary to protect and preserve retirement benefits
pending division of a marital estate and to enter such orders as are
necessary to enforce the terms of the property settlement after it
has been determined. Any order entered pursuant to § 30-2-51(e)
will be effective unless in conflict with federal law or other state
law or unless the order modifies the terms of a retirement plan or
enlarges the benefits payable under the plan. See, e.g., 26 U.S.C. §
414(p)(3) (prohibiting state domestic relations order from requiring
retirement plan administrator to pay to an alternate payee any type,
form, or amount of retirement benefit not available under the terms
of the retirement plan).
72