CORRELATION TABLE FORMS REFERENCE TABLE
ARIZONA RULES OF FAMILY LAW PROCEDURE
I. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
Rule
1. Scope of Rules
2. Applicability of Other Rules
3. Definitions
4. Time
5. Consolidation
6. Change of Judge
7. Protected and Unpublished Addresses
8. Telephonic Appearances and Testimony
9. Duties of Counsel
10. Representation of Children; Minors and Incompetent Persons
11. Presence of Children
12. Court Interviews of Children
13. Public Access to Proceedings
14. Sworn Written Verification; Unsworn Declarations under Penalty of Perjury
15. Affirmation in Lieu of Oath
16. Interpreters
17. Limitation on Examination of Witness; Exception
18. Preservation of Verbatim Recording of Court Proceedings
19. Lost Records; Method of Supplying, Substitution of Copies; Hearing if Corrections
Denied
20. Electronic Filing
21. Local Rules by Superior Court
22. [Reserved]
II. PLEADINGS AND MOTIONS
Rule
23. Commencement of Action
24. Pleadings Allowed
25. Family Law Cover Sheet
26. Additional Filings
27. Service on the Opposing Party or Additional Parties
28. Mandatory Responsive Filings
29. General Rules of Pleading
30. Form of Pleading
31. Signing of Pleadings
32. Defenses and Objections; When and How Presented; By Pleading or Motion; Motion for
Judgment on Pleadings
33. Counterclaims; Third Party Practice
134. Amended and Supplemental Pleadings
35. Family Law Motion Practice
III. PARTIES
Rule
36. Real Party in Interest
37. Substitution of Parties
38. Process on Behalf of and Against Persons Not Parties
39. Proof of Authority by Attorney for Defendant Not Personally Served
IV. SERVICE OF PROCESS
Rule
40. Process
41. Service of Process within Arizona
42. Service of Process Outside of State
43. Service and Filing of Pleadings and Other Papers; Sensitive Data Form
V. DEFAULT DECREE, CONSENT DECREE, AND DISMISSAL
Rule
45. 44. Default Decree
46. Dismissal
Consent Decree, Order or Judgment Without Hearing
VI. TEMPORARY ORDERS
Rule
47. Temporary Orders
48. Temporary Orders Without Notice
VII. DISCLOSURE AND DISCOVERY
Rule
49. Disclosure
50. Complex Case Disclosure
51. Discovery
52. Subpoena
53. Protective Orders Regarding Discovery Requests
54. Depositions before Action or Pending Appeal
55. Persons before Whom Depositions May Be Taken
56. Stipulations Regarding Discovery Procedure
57. Depositions upon Oral Examination
58. Depositions upon Written Questions
59. Use of Depositions in Court Proceedings
60. Interrogatories to Parties
61. Uniform and Non-Uniform Interrogatories; Limitations; Procedure
62. Production of Documents and Things and Entry upon Land for Inspection and Other
Purposes
63. Physical, Mental, and Vocational Evaluations of Persons
64. Requests for Admission
265. Failure to Make Disclosure or Discovery; Sanctions
VIII. SETTLEMENT AND ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION (ADR)
Rule
66. 67. Alternative Dispute Resolution; Purpose, Definitions, Initiation, and Duty
Mediation, Arbitration, Settlement Conferences, and Other Dispute Resolution Processes
Outside of Conciliation Court Services
68. Conciliation Court Services; Counseling, Mandatory Mediation, Assessment or
Evaluation and Other Services
69. Binding Agreements
70. Settlement
71. Sanctions and Attorneys’ Fees
72. Family Law Master
73. Family Law Conference Officer
74. Parenting Coordinator
75. Plan for Expedited Process
IX. PRETRIAL AND TRIAL PROCEDURES
Rule
76. Pretrial Procedures
77. Trial Procedures
X. JUDGMENTS AND DECREES
Rule
78. Judgments; Costs; Attorneys’ Fees
79. Summary Judgment
80. Declaratory Judgments
81. Entry of Judgment
82. Findings by the Court; Judgment on Partial Findings
83. Motion for New Trial
84. Motion to Alter or Amend a Judgment or Decree
85. Motion to Correct Mistakes; Relief from a Judgment or Decree
86. Harmless Error
87. Stay of Proceedings
88. Disability of a Judge
89. Judgment for Specific Acts; Vesting Title
90. Process on Behalf of and Against Persons Not Parties
XI. POST-DECREE/POST-JUDGMENT PROCEEDINGS
Rule
91. Post-Decree and Post-Judgment Proceedings
XII. CIVIL CONTEMPT AND ARREST WARRANTS
Rule
92. 93. 94. Civil Contempt and Sanctions for Non-Compliance with a Court Order
Seizure of Person or Property
Civil and Child Support Arrest Warrants
3XIII. OTHER FAMILY LAW SERVICES AND RESOURCES
Rule
95. 96. [Reserved]
Other Family Law Services and Resources
XIV. FAMILY LAW FORMS
Rule
97. Family Law Forms
4I. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
Rule 1. Scope of Rules
These rules govern the procedure in the Superior Court of Arizona in all family law cases,
including paternity, and all other matters, arising out of Title 25, Arizona Revised Statutes
(A.R.S.) and, where ordered by the presiding judge of a county or the presiding judge’s designee,
Orders of Protection, Injunctions Against Harassment and all proceedings, judgments or decrees
related to the establishment, modification or enforcement of such orders, including contempt.
These rules should be construed and enforced in a manner to secure the just, prompt and
inexpensive determination of every action and proceeding.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 1, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. Wherever the language in
these rules is substantially the same as the language in other statewide rules, the case law
interpreting that language will apply to these rules.
Rule 2. Applicability of Other Rules
A. Applicability of Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. The Arizona Rules of Civil
Procedure apply only when incorporated by reference in these rules.
B. Applicability of Arizona Rules of Evidence
1. Upon notice to the court filed by any party at least forty-five (45) days prior to
hearing or trial, or such other date as may be established by the court, any party may
require strict compliance with all or part of the Arizona Rules of Evidence. If a hearing
or trial is set upon less than sixty (60) days prior notice, the notice provided for in this
paragraph will be deemed timely if filed within a reasonable time after the party
receives notice of the hearing or trial date.
2. If no such notice is filed, all relevant evidence is admissible, provided, however,
that the court shall exclude evidence if its probative value is outweighed by the danger
of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or by considerations of undue delay, waste
of time, needless presentation of cumulative evidence, lack of reliability or failure to
adequately and timely disclose same.
3. The foregoing notwithstanding, records of regularly conducted activity as
defined in Rule 803(6), Arizona Rules of Evidence, may be admitted into evidence
without testimony of a custodian or other qualified witness as to its authenticity if such
document (a) appears complete and accurate on its face, (b) appears to be relevant and
reliable, and (c) is seasonably disclosed and copies are provided at time of disclosure to
all other parties.
4. Any report, document, or standardized form required to be submitted to the court
for the current hearing or trial may be considered as evidence if either filed with the
court or admitted into evidence by the court.
5C. Applicability of Local Rules. To the extent these rules are inconsistent with local rules,
the provisions of these rules shall apply.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
Rule 2(B)(4) allows the court to consider as evidence at any stage of the proceedings any
report or document ordered or required by the court to be submitted to the court. This allows
the court to consider drug testing results and reports from court-appointed attorneys, guardians
ad litem, custody or parenting time evaluators, conciliation services, family law masters,
Parenting Coordinators, and other court-appointed experts. The evidentiary value is limited to
the particular trial, hearing or conference for which it is prepared and filed.
Rule 3. Definitions
A. Parties. Reference to a party to the action may include the state.
B. Definitions. In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
definitions shall apply:
1. In camera. If the court orders that a document be reviewed in camera, the party
who possesses the document shall submit the document ex parte to the court. The court
shall then privately review the document to determine whether it should be further
disclosed under applicable law and rules.
2. Motion. A motion is a written request made after a petition seeking relief is filed.
3. Moving Party. The party (movant or applicant) who has filed a written request
for relief, regardless of whether or not that party was the petitioner or respondent in the
initial petition.
4. Petition. A petition is the initial pleading that commences a family law case or
the initial pleading that commences a post-decree matter. All initial documents shall be
denominated as a petition followed by brief descriptive wording summarizing the nature
of the relief sought.
5. Petitioner. A petitioner is a person or entity who files the first petition, and shall
be referred to as such in all subsequent documents, including all post-decree petitions,
motions and documents in the same case.
6. Respondent. A respondent is any opposing party other than the petitioner.
7. Response. A response is a document that substantially responds to a petition or a
motion, and includes an answer to a petition.
8. Sealing. If the court orders that a paper or electronic record or portion of a
record is to be sealed, the record or portion of the record shall be sealed by the Clerk of
the Court, and the record or portion of the record shall be accessible or disclosed only to
those persons designated by order of the court. This definition is not intended to affect
the substantive rights of any party.
69. Title IV-D. Title IV-D means Title IV-D of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C.
651 et seq. Title IV-D is administered in Arizona by the Division of Child Support
Enforcement (DCSE) of the Department of Economic Security.
10. Witness. A witness is a person whose declaration under oath or affirmation is
received as evidence for any purpose, whether such declaration is made on oral
examination, by deposition or by affidavit.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
The definition of “witness” in subdivision B(10) is based on Rule 43(a), Arizona Rules of
Civil Procedure.
Rule 4. Time
A. Computation. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by these rules, by
any local rules, by order of court, or by any applicable statute, the day of the act, event or default
from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. When the period of
time prescribed or allowed, exclusive of any additional time allowed under paragraph D, is less
than eleven (11) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall not be included
in the computation. When that period of time is eleven (11) days or more, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be included in the computation. The last day of the
period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, in
which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a
legal holiday.
B. Enlargement. When by these rules or by a notice given thereunder or by order of court
an act is required or allowed to be done at or within a specified time, the court for cause shown
may at any time in its discretion (1) with or without motion or notice order the period enlarged if
request therefor is made before the expiration of the period originally prescribed or as extended
by a previous order or (2) upon motion made after the expiration of the specified period permit
the act to be done where the failure to act was the result of excusable neglect; but it may not
extend the time for taking any action under Rules 83(D), 84, and 85(C), except to the extent and
under the conditions stated in them, unless the court finds (1) that a party entitled to notice of the
entry of judgment or order did not receive such notice from the clerk or any party within 21 days
of its entry, and (2) that no party would be prejudiced, in which case the court may, upon motion
filed within thirty days after the expiration of the period originally prescribed or within 7 days of
receipt of such notice, whichever is earlier, extend the time for taking such action for a period of
10 days from the date of entry of the order extending the time for taking such action.
C. Orders to Appear. A judge of the superior court, upon request or petition supported by
affidavit showing cause therefor, may issue an order requiring a party to appear and may make
the order returnable at such time as the judge designates. Any such order to appear shall be
served in accordance with the requirements of Rule 40, 41, or 42, as applicable, of these rules or,
if the party to whom the order is directed has entered an appearance in the action, in accordance
with the requirements of Rule 43, within such time as the judge shall direct.
7D. Additional Time after Service by Mail. Whenever a party has the right or is required to
do some act within a prescribed period after the service of a notice or other paper upon the party
and the notice or paper is served by mail, five (5) calendar days shall be added to the prescribed
period. This rule has no application to the mailing of notice of entry of judgment required by
Rule 81(D).
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 6, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 5. Consolidation
A. Scope of Consolidation. When actions within the scope of these rules involving a
common child, common parties, or a common question of law or fact, are pending before the
court, the court may order a joint hearing or trial of any or all the matters in issue in the actions
or order all the actions consolidated, and the court may make such orders concerning
proceedings therein to avoid unnecessary costs or delay or to serve in the best interest of a minor
child.
B. Lowest Case Number. Unless otherwise ordered by the court, when two or more cases
are consolidated, the clerk of the court shall regard the number of the case filed first as the
controlling number of the consolidated cases, and all further pleadings and papers shall be filed
and docketed under that number only. Unless the court shall otherwise specify, it will be
presumed that the consolidation is for all purposes, and not merely for the purpose of trial.
Unless the court shall otherwise order, motions to consolidate shall be heard by the judge to
whom the earliest-filed case is assigned. A case involving only an order of protection may be
consolidated into the substantive family law case.
C. Duplicate Petitions. When two or more cases are consolidated by court order wherein
the parties have previously filed competing or duplicate petitions that substantially respond to the
issues in the opposing petition by stating detailed allegations, requests, or positions on the issues,
such petitions shall also serve in all respects as responses to the opposing petitions, unless the
court, on motion of any party or its own motion, orders further response.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rules 42(a) and 65(a), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 6. Change of Judge
All notices and requests for change of judge shall be made in accordance with Rule 42(f),
Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 7. Protected and Unpublished Addresses
A. When Filing an Initial or Post-judgment Petition or Motion. Any person filing an
initial or post-judgment petition, motion or response, whose address is not known to the other
8party and who reasonably believes that physical or emotional harm may result to the person or a
minor child if the person’s address is not protected from disclosure, may request the court to
designate that party’s address as protected by:
1. filing the substantive petition, motion or response thereto with no address
included on it; and
2. filing a written request using the Request for Protected Address Form, Rule 97,
Form 15; and
3. lodging a proposed form of order with the court, ordering that the address be
protected, except that if there is a valid Order of Protection and the clerk can verify the
existence of the Order of Protection, address confidentiality shall be automatic upon
filing a written request as required by subdivision A(2) above; and
4. filing the party’s address on a separate sheet of paper for court use.
If the court orders that the address shall be protected, the clerk of the court shall thereafter
protect the person’s address from public disclosure until the court orders otherwise. A person
whose address is protected from disclosure under this rule may be served with all subsequently
filed documents, by regular first-class mail at the address provided to the clerk in the manner
provided in this rule. If the court does not order that the party’s address is protected, all
subsequent filings must include the party’s address.
B. Court Action.
1. Within five (5) days of the filing of a request for an address to be protected, the
court shall rule on the request, ex parte, without a hearing, unless the court finds it
appropriate to set the request for hearing. If the court sets the request for hearing, all
parties who have appeared shall be notified of the hearing, and the hearing shall be held
within twenty (20) days of the filing of the request.
2. At any time during the proceedings, the court may order that any protected
address no longer be protected upon request of the party whose address is protected or
after a hearing and upon a finding that there is no reasonable belief that physical or
emotional harm may result to the person with the protected address or to a minor child.
C. When Serving a Response or Document upon a Party with a Protected Address.
Any person required under these rules to serve a response or other document upon a person
whose address is ordered protected from disclosure under this rule may serve the same by
delivering true and correct copies of the documents to be served, together with the proper fee
established by administrative order to cover the cost of service, to the clerk of the court. The
clerk shall promptly mail the documents by regular first-class mail to the most recent protected
address provided to the clerk, and service shall be deemed complete upon mailing. The clerk
shall promptly file a written statement verifying the documents that were mailed and the date of
mailing to the protected address signed by the clerk or deputy clerk who mailed the documents.
All documents mailed to a protected address shall bear the clerk’s return address, and a notation
of any process returned as undelivered shall be made in the court file.
9D. Continuing Duty to Provide the Clerk with Current Address. Any person whose
address is ordered protected from disclosure under this rule shall have a continuing duty to
provide the clerk of the court with a current and correct mailing address where the person can be
served with process until one of the following events occur:
1. the person whose address is ordered protected files a written notice of published
address in the court file, containing both the person’s current mailing addresses where
future service can be accomplished under these rules, and the person mails a copy of the
notice by regular first-class mail to the last address of all persons who have previously
appeared in the action; or
2. the initial or post-judgment petition or motion has been fully adjudicated by the
entry of a final appealable order, judgment or decree, and the time to appeal such order,
judgment or decree has expired such that personal service is again required for
subsequent petitions under Rule 43(C)(2), as appropriate.
E. Protecting the Address in a Title IV-D Case. Nothing in this rule is intended to change
the practice of protecting the address of a parent seeking services in a Title IV-D case as required
by federal law.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
To provide protection to litigants and children subjected to domestic violence, any party
may file or respond to a family law proceeding without disclosing that person’s address once the
court has approved the action and ordered the address protected. This rule is not intended as an
alternative to normal service requirements where a party or minor child is not in danger from
domestic violence. Any party choosing this alternative is required to continually maintain a
current and correct address with the clerk of the court where he or she can be served with
process, until the current proceedings are completed with the entry of a final order, judgment or
decree and the time for appeal has passed or the person whose address is protected files and
serves a written notice of a current unpublished mailing address. In reference to subdivision
(A)(3) of this rule, the Committee recognizes that not all courts may have the resources and
electronic capability to verify Orders of Protection; however, where verification is possible,
address confidentiality should be automatic.
Rule 8. Telephonic Appearances and Testimony
A. Oral Argument or Appearance on Any Motion or Other Proceeding. The court may,
in its discretion, except as otherwise provided by A.R.S. § 25-1256(F), order or allow oral
argument or appearance on any motion or other proceeding by speaker telephonic conference
call, or regular telephonic conference call, provided the conversations of all parties and counsel
are audible to each participant, the judge and, where applicable, the court reporter or electronic
recording. The party requesting telephonic argument shall set up the conference call and, unless
otherwise ordered by the court, pay for same.
B. Party or Witness Testimony. Upon request of a party or witness, or on its own motion,
and upon finding that no substantial prejudice will result to any party by allowing telephonic or
video conference testimony, the court may allow a party or witness to give testimony at any
10evidentiary hearing or trial telephonically or by video conference if the court finds, as to a party:
that the party is reasonably prevented from attending the hearing or trial, or that attendance in
person at hearing or trial would be a burdensome expense to the party; and, as to a witness: (1)
that the witness is reasonably prevented from attending the hearing or trial, (2) that the witness
would be unduly inconvenienced by attending the hearing or trial, or (3) that attendance in
person at hearing or trial would be a burdensome expense to the witness.
C. Providing Documents for Telephonic or Video Conferences. Any documents a party
wishes to introduce into evidence through a party or witness appearing telephonically or by video
conference shall, where practicable, be provided in advance to the party or witness. Exact
duplicates shall be provided to opposing counsel with an affirmation on the record by the party
introducing same that they are true and correct copies of the documents provided to the party or
witness who will be appearing telephonically or by video conference.
D. Filing a Request for a Telephonic or Video Conference. Any party intending to have a
party or witness give testimony at trial or evidentiary hearing telephonically or by video
conference, shall file a request for same not later than thirty (30) days prior to the trial or
evidentiary hearing unless the time to trial or evidentiary hearing is less than thirty (30) days, in
which case the request shall be filed not later than five (5) days prior to time of trial or
evidentiary hearing, unless the party is relieved of this time requirement by the court. Opposition
to said request shall be made within five (5) days after service, following which the court may, in
its discretion, rule upon said request with or without hearing. Unless otherwise ordered by the
court, the party requesting telephonic testimony shall arrange and pay for same.
Rule 9. Duties of Counsel
A. Attorney of Record: Withdrawal and Substitution of Counsel
1. Attorney of Record: Duties of Counsel. No attorney shall appear in any action or
file anything in any action without first appearing as counsel of record. Except as
pursuant to paragraph B, an attorney of record shall be deemed responsible as attorney
of record in all matters before and after judgment until the time for appeal from a
judgment has expired or a judgment has become final after appeal or until there has
been a formal withdrawal from or substitution in the case.
2. Withdrawal and Substitution. Except pursuant to paragraph B, or when
substituting counsel with consent of the client, or where provided otherwise in any local
rules pertaining to family law cases, no attorney shall be permitted to withdraw, or be
substituted, as attorney of record in any pending action except by formal written order
of the court, supported by written application setting forth the reasons therefor together
with the name, mailing address, and telephone number of the client, unless protected
pursuant to Rule 7, as follows:
a. Where such application bears the written approval of the client, it shall
be accompanied by a proposed written order and may be presented to the court
ex parte. The withdrawing attorney shall give prompt notice of the entry of
such order to all other parties or their attorneys.
11b. Where such application does not bear the written approval of the client,
it shall be made by motion and shall be served upon the client and all other
parties or their attorneys. The motion shall be accompanied by a certificate of
the attorney making the motion that (1) the client has been notified in writing
of the status of the case including the dates and times of any court hearings or
trial settings, pending compliance with any existing court orders, and the
possibility of sanctions, or (2) the client cannot be located or for other reasons
cannot be notified of the pendency of the motion and the status of the case.
c. No attorney shall be permitted to withdraw as attorney of record after an
action has been set for trial unless:
1) the substituting attorney signs the application stating that such
attorney is advised of the trial date and will be prepared for trial, or
the client signs the application stating that the client is advised of the
trial date and has made suitable arrangements to be prepared for trial,
or
2) the court finds good cause to permit the attorney to withdraw.
B. Limited Scope Representation: Appearance and Withdrawal. This provision shall be
deemed experimental in nature and shall expire three (3) calendar years from the initial effective
date of these rules unless otherwise extended.
1. Limited Appearance. An attorney may make a limited appearance subject to E.R.
1.2, Arizona Rules of Professional Conduct, by filing a Notice of Limited Scope
Representation as prescribed in Rule 97, Form 1, stating that the attorney and the party
have a written agreement that the attorney will provide limited scope representation to
the party and specifying the matter or issues with regard to which the attorney will
represent the party. Service on an attorney who has made a limited appearance for a
party shall be valid, to the extent permitted by statute and Rule 43(C), in all matters in
the case but shall not extend the attorney’s responsibility for representation of the client
beyond the specific matter for which the attorney has appeared. Nothing in this rule
shall limit an attorney’s ability to provide limited services to a client without appearing
of record in any judicial proceedings.
2. Withdrawal and Substitution. In addition to the provisions for withdrawal of
counsel pursuant to paragraph A of this rule, an attorney who has made a limited
appearance in an action shall be permitted to withdraw, or be substituted, as attorney of
record in any pending action as set forth in this rule.
a. With Consent. Upon the attorney’s completion of the task specified in
the Notice of Limited Scope Representation, the attorney shall file a Notice of
Withdrawal of Attorney with Consent, signed by both the attorney and the
party, stating that the attorney will no longer be representing the party, and,
unless protected pursuant to Rule 7, stating the last known address and
telephone number of the party who will no longer be represented, and shall
lodge a form of order to be signed by the court. The attorney shall provide a
12copy of the notice to the party who will no longer be represented and to all
other parties or their attorneys, if they are represented by counsel.
b. Without Consent. Notwithstanding paragraph A, an attorney who has
completed the task specified in the Notice of Limited Scope Representation
may use the procedure in this rule to request that the attorney be withdrawn as
counsel in the case in which the attorney has appeared before the court as
attorney of record and the client has not signed a Notice of Withdrawal with
Consent. Such request shall be made by motion and shall be served upon the
client and all other parties or their attorneys, along with a proposed form of
order. If no objection is filed within ten (10) days from the date the motion is
served on the client, the court shall sign the order. After the order is signed, the
attorney shall serve a copy of the signed order on the client. If an objection is
filed within ten (10) days of service of the motion, the court may conduct a
hearing to determine whether the task for which the attorney appeared has been
completed.
C. Responsibility to Court. Each attorney shall be responsible for keeping advised of the
status of cases in which that attorney has appeared, or their positions on the calendars of the
court and of any assignments for hearing or argument. Upon relocation, each attorney shall
advise the clerk of court and court administrator, in each of the counties in which that attorney
has cases that are pending, of the attorney’s current office address and telephone number.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 5.1, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. This rule will be reviewed
in two (2) years by a committee appointed by the Supreme Court to review the Arizona Rules of
Family Law Procedure.
Examples of limited scope services under paragraph B that a client may seek from a
licensed attorney are stated in Rule 97, Form 1, Notice of Limited Scope Representation, and
include but are not limited to such matters as protective orders, establishment or modification of
child support, temporary orders, and Qualified Domestic Relations Orders (QDROs).
Rule 10. Representation of Children; Minors and Incompetent Persons
A. Appointment of Child’s Attorney, Best Interests Attorney, and Court Advisor
1. The court may appoint one or more of the following:
a. a best interests attorney;
b. a child’s attorney; or
c. a court advisor.
2. The court may appoint an attorney to represent a child in a family law case
pursuant to A.R. S. § 25-321 if it finds any of the following:
13a. there is an allegation of abuse or neglect of a child;
b. the parents are persistently in significant conflict with one another;
c. there is a history of substance abuse by either parent, or family violence;
d. there are serious concerns about the mental health or behavior of either
parent;
e. the child is an infant or toddler;
f. the child has special needs; or
g. any other reason deemed appropriate by the court.
3. The order of appointment must clearly set forth the terms of the appointment,
including the reasons for and duration of the appointment, rights of access as provided
under this paragraph and applicable terms of compensation.
B. Qualifications of Child’s Attorney or Best Interests Attorney. The court may appoint
as a child’s attorney or best interests attorney only an individual who is qualified through
training or experience in the type of proceeding in which the appointment is made, as determined
by the court and according to any standards established by Arizona law or rule.
C. Qualifications of Court Advisor. The court may appoint as court advisor for a child
only a qualified individual or a non-profit or governmental organization of qualified individuals.
To be qualified, an individual must have received training or have experience in the type of
proceeding in which the appointment is made, according to any standards established by Arizona
law or rule. An attorney appointed as court advisor may take only those actions that may be
taken by a court advisor who is not an attorney.
D. Access to Child and Information Relating to Child.
1. Subject to subdivision 3 and any conditions imposed by the court that are
required by law, rules of professional conduct, the child’s needs, or the circumstances of
the proceeding, the court shall issue an order of access at the time of an order of
appointment, authorizing the child’s attorney, best interests attorney, or court advisor to
have immediate access to the child and any otherwise privileged or confidential
information relating to the child.
2. The custodian of any relevant record relating to a child shall provide access to a
person authorized by order issued pursuant to this rule to access the records.
3. A child’s record that is privileged or confidential under law other than this rule
may be released to a person appointed under this rule only in accordance with that law.
14E. Participation in Proceeding by Child’s Attorney, Best Interests Attorney, And Court
Advisor.
1. A child’s attorney or best interests attorney shall participate in the conduct of the
litigation to the same extent as an attorney for any party.
2. A child’s attorney, best interests attorney, and court advisor may not engage in
ex parte contact with the court except as authorized by law other than this rule.
3. A court advisor may not take any action that may be taken only by a licensed
attorney, including making opening and closing statements, examining witnesses, and
engaging in discovery other than as a witness.
4. The court shall ensure that any court advisor for a child has an opportunity to
testify or submit a report setting forth:
a. the court advisor’s recommendations regarding the best interests of the
child; and
b. the bases for the court advisor’s recommendations.
5. In a proceeding, a party, including a child’s attorney or best interests attorney,
may call any court advisor for the child as a witness for the purpose of cross-
examination regarding the advisor’s report without the advisor’s being listed as a
witness by a party.
6. An attorney appointed as child’s attorney or best interests attorney may not:
a. be compelled to produce the attorney’s work product developed during
the appointment;
b. be required to disclose the source of information obtained as a result of
the appointment;
c. submit a report into evidence; or
d. testify in court.
7. Subdivision 6 does not alter the duty of an attorney to report child abuse or
neglect under applicable law.
F. Fees and Expenses in Custody Proceeding. The court may allocate fees and expenses
between the parties in accordance with all applicable Arizona law and rules.
G. Appointments from Juvenile Dependency Rosters. The court shall not appoint a best
interests attorney, a child’s attorney, or a court advisor from a state or county-funded juvenile
dependency roster unless the court finds that a child may be the victim of child abuse or neglect
as defined in A.R.S. § 8-201.
15H. Minors and Incompetent Persons. Whenever a minor or incompetent person has a
representative appointed by the court or authorized by Title 14, Arizona Revised Statutes, the
representative may act on behalf of the minor or incompetent person to the extent allowed under
Arizona law or the court’s order of appointment. The court shall not appoint a guardian to act on
behalf of the minor or incompetent, except as provided by Title 14, Arizona Revised Statutes.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
The American Bar Association Standards of Practice for Lawyers Representing Children in
Custody Cases, adopted August 2003, provides guidance to the court, counsel, and litigants
about the appointment of attorneys for children. The Standards include suggestions about when
and how an attorney should be appointed, and in which capacity, and detail what the attorney’s
responsibilities are to the court and the client.
A court advisor shall not function as an attorney but shall independently investigate the case
and make recommendations to the court. The National Conference of Commissioners on
Uniform State Laws 2005 draft of the Representation of Children in Abuse and Neglect and
Custody Proceedings Act provides guidance to the court, court advisors and litigants about the
appointment of court advisors, as well as their role and responsibilities.
Paragraph G of this rule is based on Rule 17(g), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 11. Presence of Children
The court may, in its discretion, exclude minor children from any proceeding if the presence
of a minor child may not be in the child’s best interest or may be disruptive or distracting to the
proceeding. The presence of a minor child affected by a family law proceeding is generally not
in the child’s best interest and such child shall not be present during any proceeding involving
said child, or the parents of said child, without prior permission of the court.
Rule 12. Court Interviews of Children
On motion of any party, or its own motion, the court may, in its discretion, conduct an in
camera interview with a minor child who is the subject of a custody or parenting time dispute, to
ascertain the child’s wishes as to the child’s custodian and as to parenting time. The interview
may be conducted at any stage of the proceeding and shall be recorded by a court reporter or any
electronic medium that is retrievable in perceivable form. The record of the interview may be
sealed, in whole or in part, based upon good cause and after considering the best interests of the
child. The parties may stipulate that the record of the interview shall not be provided to the
parties or that the interview may be conducted off the record.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
Arizona Revised Statutes § 25-405 allows for an in camera interview of a child to ascertain
the child’s wishes as to the child’s custodian and as to parenting time. A record of the proceeding
will be kept to ensure the integrity of the process, to allow for rebuttal information in appropriate
cases, and to provide for appropriate appellate review. The definition of “record” is derived from
A.R.S. § 25-1010(E).
16Rule 13. Public Access to Proceedings
A. Presumptively Open Family Court Proceedings. Family court proceedings are
presumptively open to the public; however, to promote amicable settlement of the issues, to
protect the best interests of a minor child, or to protect the parties from physical or emotional
harm, the court may exclude the public pursuant to paragraph B.
B. Order to Close the Courtroom. Upon its own motion, or upon motion filed and served
by an interested person not less than two (2) days before the proceeding, the court may enter an
order closing the courtroom based upon finding made on the record that:
1. there exists a compelling interest in closure that outweighs the public interest in
attending the proceeding;
2. there are no alternatives to closure that will protect the compelling interest; and
3. the closure ordered is no broader than necessary to protect the compelling
interest.
C. Stipulation to Close the Courtroom. A stipulation to close the courtroom shall not
alone constitute a justification for closure.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
ARS § 25-407(D) provides: “If the court finds that to protect the child’s welfare, the record
of any interview, report investigation, or testimony in a custody proceeding should be kept
secret, the court may then make an appropriate order sealing the record.”
Rule 14. Sworn Written Verification; Unsworn Declarations Under Penalty of Perjury
A. Sworn Written Verification. A sworn written verification is required for: (1) an
acceptance or waiver of service under Rule 40(F), (2) a stipulation or agreement that
substantially changes the terms of a custody or parenting time order, unless entered into in open
court or conciliation services, (3) an affidavit submitted pursuant to Rule 44(B)(1)(b), or (4) a
consent decree submitted to the court under Rule 45.
B. Unsworn Declarations Under Penalty of Perjury. Except as provided in paragraph A,
wherever, under these rules, or under any rule, regulation, order, or requirement made pursuant
to these rules, any matter is required to be supported, evidenced, established, or proved by the
sworn written declaration, verification, certificate, statement, oath, or affidavit of the person
making the same (other than a deposition, or an oath of office, or an oath required to be taken
before a specified official other than a notary public), such matter may be supported, evidenced,
established, or proved by the unsworn written declaration, certificate, verification, or statement,
subscribed by such person as true under penalty of perjury, and dated, in substantially the
following form:
“I declare (or certify, verify or state) under penalty of perjury that
the foregoing is true and correct. Executed on (date).
17(Signature)”
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 80(i), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 15. Affirmation in Lieu of Oath
Whenever under these rules an oath is required to be taken, a solemn affirmation may be
accepted in lieu thereof.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 43(b), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 16. Interpreters
The court may appoint an interpreter of its own selection and may fix the interpreter's
reasonable compensation. The compensation shall be paid out of funds provided by law or by
one or more of the parties as the court may direct, and may be taxed as costs, in the discretion of
the court.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 43(c), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 17. Limitation on Examination of Witness; Exception
Only one attorney on each side shall conduct the examination of a witness until such
examination is completed, except when the court grants permission for other attorneys to conduct
the examination.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 43(d), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 18. Preservation of Verbatim Record of Court Proceedings
The official verbatim recording and electronic recordings of any court proceeding is an
official record of the court. The original of such notes shall be kept by the person who recorded
it, a court-designated custodian, or the clerk of the court in such place or places as shall be
designated by the court. Unless the court specifies a different period for the retention of such
verbatim recording, it shall be retained according to the records retention and disposition
schedules and purge lists adopted by the Supreme Court.
18COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 43(k), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, as amended in 2005.
Rule 19. Lost Records; Method of Supplying, Substitution of Copies; Hearing if
Corrections Denied
When the records and papers of an action or proceeding, or part thereof, are lost or
destroyed, they may be supplied and copies substituted in accordance with Rule 80(h), Arizona
Rules of Civil Procedure.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
To facilitate uniformity in record keeping, Rule 80(h), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, is
adopted in its entirety.
Rule 20. Electronic Filing
The court may permit electronic filing of a document in any action or proceeding in a
manner authorized and prescribed by Rule 124, Rules of the Supreme Court of Arizona, unless
these rules, a court order, or other legal authority expressly prohibit electronic filing.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
Rule 124, Rules of the Supreme Court of Arizona, provides that: “The presiding judge of the
Superior Court in each county may permit by appropriate court rule the electronic filing of
documents in the Superior Court and Justice Courts in each county.”
Rule 21. Local Rules of Superior Court
With the approval of a majority of the judges of the county, the presiding judge may
supplement these rules by local rules, not inconsistent with the provisions of these rules, which
shall be promulgated and published upon approval of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
To facilitate uniformity, Rule 83, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, is adopted in its entirety.
Rule 22. [Reserved]
19II. PLEADINGS AND MOTIONS
Rule 23. Commencement of Action
A family law action is commenced by filing a petition with the clerk of the court. During the
pendency of an action, parties who are not represented by counsel shall keep the court apprised
of their current mailing addresses. Each party shall notify the court within ten (10) days of any
changes in the party’s mailing address.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 3, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 24. Pleadings Allowed
A. Petition. A party shall commence the following actions by filing a verified petition with
the clerk of the superior court: Annulment (A.R.S. § 25-301), Dissolution (A.R.S. § 25-312),
Legal Separation (A.R.S. § 25- 313), Child Custody or Visitation by Nonparent (A.R.S. § 25-
415), Grandparent or Great-grandparent Visitation (A.R.S. § 25-409), Dissolution of Covenant
Marriage (A.R.S. § 25-903), Legal Separation in Covenant Marriage (A.R.S. § 25-904),
Protective Order (A.R.S. § 13-3602), Paternity or Maternity (A.R.S. § 25-806), establish,
enforce, register, or modify custody or parenting time (A.R.S. §§ 25-403, -411, and -803(C)), or
to establish, enforce, register, or modify support (A.R.S. §§ 25-320 and 25-503).
B. Notice of Filing a Foreign Judgment. A party shall file a foreign judgment or decree
pertaining to the disposition of marital property or debt pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 12-1701 to 1708.
A party shall commence an action for disposition of property (A.R.S. § 25-318(A)) or
maintenance (A.R.S. § 25- 319(A)) pursuant to the decree from a foreign court by filing the
foreign judgment pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 12-1701 to 1708. Once the party has filed the foreign
judgment, the party may file a petition for order to appear specifying the relief sought. This
paragraph is not intended to create any new substantive right.
C. Voluntary Acknowledgment of Paternity. A party seeking to acknowledge paternity
voluntarily may do so by filing with the clerk of the superior court any of the documents listed in
A.R.S. § 25-812.
D. Appearance of Parties and Child; Warrant to Take Physical Custody of a Child. A
party may apply for issuance of an order for appearance of parties and child, or a warrant to take
physical custody of a child, pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 25-1040 and 25-1061.
E. Response. Response is defined in Rule 3(B)(7).
F. Other Pleadings. Other pleadings may include a third-party petition and response and
such other pre-judgment/pre-decree or post-judgment/post-decree pleadings as otherwise
provided for in these rules.
20COMMITTEE COMMENT
The procedures set forth in paragraph D are based on the provisions of the Uniform Child
Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act and replace habeas corpus procedures that may
previously have been used in some jurisdictions.
Rule 25. Family Law Cover Sheet
By administrative order of the presiding judge, or local rule, a county may require that,
along with all original filings, the party shall include a family law cover sheet in the form and
containing the information designated by the presiding judge or the presiding judge’s designee.
Rule 26. Additional Filings
A. Preliminary Injunction and Summons with Petition for Annulment, Dissolution,
Legal Separation, Dissolution of Covenant Marriage, or Legal Separation in Covenant
Marriage. Along with the original petition for annulment, dissolution, legal separation,
dissolution of covenant marriage, or legal separation in covenant marriage, the party shall
present to the clerk of the court a preliminary injunction for issuance pursuant to A.R.S. § 25-
315(A), a summons and a copy of the summons so that the clerk of the court may issue the
summons and the copy of the summons for service on the opposing party.
B. Summons with Original Petition for Child Custody by Parent, Paternity or
Maternity. Along with the original petition for child custody by parent, paternity, or maternity,
the party shall present to the clerk of the court a summons and a copy of the summons so that the
clerk of the court may issue the summons and the copy of the summons for service on the
opposing party.
C. Order to Appear. Along with the original petition seeking relief for other than those
actions listed in paragraphs A and B, the party shall present to the court an original and copy of
an order to appear for the court to schedule a hearing on the petition.
D. Notices, Forms, and Orders. A party filing a petition shall present to the clerk of the
court for issuance, all notices, forms, and orders required by statute, these rules, local rule or
administrative order to be served on the opposing party.
Rule 27. Service on the Opposing Party or Additional Parties
A. Summons, Preliminary Injunction, and Petition. In an action for annulment,
dissolution, legal separation, dissolution of covenant marriage, or legal separation in covenant
marriage, the petitioner shall serve upon the opposing party a copy of the petition, a copy of the
summons, the preliminary injunction issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 25-315(A), and the notices,
forms, and orders required under Rule 26(D).
B. Summons and Petition. In an action for paternity or maternity, child custody by
nonparent, or grandparent or great-grandparent visitation, the petitioner shall serve upon all
21parties entitled to service a copy of the petition and a copy of the summons, and the notices,
forms, and orders required under Rule 26(D).
Rule 28. Mandatory Responsive Filings
The opposing party in an action for annulment, dissolution, legal separation, child custody
by parent, dissolution of covenant marriage, legal separation in covenant marriage, paternity, or
maternity who has been served with a petition shall respond by filing a response to the petition.
In the event the opposing party in one of these proceedings does not file a response, the party
who filed the action will have the right to file for a default and receive a default judgment under
Rule 44. All mandatory responsive filings shall be verified.
Rule 29. General Rules of Pleading
A. Claims for Relief. A pleading which sets forth a claim for relief shall contain: (1) a short
and plain statement of the grounds upon which the court’s jurisdiction depends, unless the court
already has jurisdiction and the claim needs no new grounds of jurisdiction to support it; (2) a
short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief, and (3) a
demand for judgment or decree for the relief the pleader seeks. Relief in the alternative or of
several different types may be demanded.
B. Form of Response; Form of Denials. A party shall state in short and plain terms the
party’s response to each claim made and shall admit or deny the statements of fact upon which
the other party relies. The response shall set forth any statement of fact on which the responding
party relies which differs from the factual statements of the other party. The response may
include any other claim for relief not referenced in the petition, but which is permitted under
these rules. If a party is without knowledge or information sufficient to form a belief as to the
truth of a statement of fact, the party shall so state and this has the effect of a denial.
C. Effect of a Response. Except as otherwise provided in Rule 32(F), the filing of a response
has the effect of placing at issue all matters pled that are not specifically admitted.
D. Pleading to be Concise and Direct; Consistency. Each statement of fact of a pleading
shall be simple, concise, and direct. No technical forms of pleading or motions are required. A
party may set forth two or more statements of a claim or defense alternatively or hypothetically.
When two or more statements are made in the alternative, and one of them if made independently
would be sufficient, the pleading is not made insufficient by the insufficiency of one or more of
the alternative statements. A party may also state as many separate claims or defenses as the
party has regardless of consistency and whether based on legal or equitable grounds or both. All
statements shall be made subject to the obligations set forth in Rule 31(A).
E. Construction of Pleadings. All pleadings shall be so construed as to do substantial
justice.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 8, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
22Rule 30. Form of Pleading
A. Caption; Names of Parties. Every pleading shall satisfy any statutory requirements and
contain a caption setting forth the name of the court, the names of the parties, the title of the
action, the file number, and the type of pleading. A party’s designation as petitioner or
respondent shall continue in all future proceedings. When the name of the respondent is
unknown to the petitioner, the respondent may be designated in the pleadings or proceeding by
any name. When the respondent’s true name is discovered, the pleading or proceeding may be
amended accordingly.
B. Paragraphs; Separate Statements. All statements of claim or factual statements shall be
made in numbered paragraphs, the contents of which shall be limited as far as practicable to a
statement of a single set of circumstances, and a paragraph may be referred to by number in all
succeeding pleadings.
C. Adoption by Reference; Exhibits. Statements in a pleading may be adopted by
reference in a different part of the same pleading or in another pleading or in a motion. A copy of
a written instrument which is an exhibit to a pleading is a part thereof for all purposes.
D. Method of Preparation and Filing
1. All pleadings and other papers filed in any action or proceeding shall be on
white, opaque, unglazed paper measuring 8-1/2 inches x 11 inches, with a margin at the
top of the first page of not less than 2 inches; a margin at the top of each subsequent
page of not less than 1-1/2 inches; a left-hand margin of not less than 1 inch; a right-
hand margin of not less than 1/2 inch; and a margin at the bottom of the page of not less
than 1/2 inch.
2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, exhibits, attachments to pleadings, or pleadings
from jurisdictions other than the State of Arizona that are larger than the specified size
shall be folded to the specified size or folded and fastened to pages of the specified size.
Exhibits or attachments to pleadings that are smaller than the specified size shall be
fastened to pages of the specified size. An exhibit, attachment to a pleading or a
pleading from a jurisdiction other than the State of Arizona not in compliance with the
foregoing provisions may be filed only if it appears that compliance is not reasonably
practicable.
3. All pleadings and other papers filed shall have the pages numbered and shall
state the number of the action, the title of the court and action, the nature of the paper
filed and the name, address, and telephone number of the attorney or party if not
represented by counsel. The attorney shall also provide the attorney’s Arizona Bar
number, and a certified legal document preparer shall provide the document preparer’s
certification number. Originals only shall be filed, except that where it is necessary to
file more than one copy of a pleading or other paper. All pleadings and other papers
filed, other than standardized forms, shall be clearly printed on one side of the page
only, and shall be double-spaced or one and one-half spaced except for quotations and
footnotes, which may be single spaced. Standardized forms may be single spaced,
except that those requiring the signature of a judge or commissioner shall be double-
23spaced or one and one-half spaced. Text of standardized forms may continue from the
front to the reverse side of a page, but any such continuation of text to the reverse side
of the page shall be printed in tumbled fashion and shall cover no more than the top half
of the tumbled page. All standardized forms shall be on paper of sufficient quality and
weight to assure legibility on both sides without bleed-through upon duplication or
microfilming.
4. Forms from the Superior Court’s Self-Service Center or the Supreme Court’s
website or the superior court’s approved electronic forms meet the requirements of this
rule.
5. The court may, on its own motion or on request of any party, waive any of the
foregoing requirements or provisions.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 10, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 31. Signing of Pleadings
A. Signing of Pleadings, Motions and Other Papers; Sanctions. Every pleading, motion,
and other paper of a party represented by an attorney shall be signed by at least one attorney of
record, whose address shall be stated. A party who is not represented by an attorney shall sign
the party’s pleading, motion, or other paper and state the party’s address. Except when otherwise
specifically provided by rule or statute, pleadings need not be verified or accompanied by
affidavit. The signature of an attorney or party constitutes a certificate by the signer that the
signer has read the pleading, motion, or other paper; that to the best of the signer’s knowledge,
information, and belief formed after reasonable inquiry it is well grounded in fact and is
warranted by existing law or a good faith argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of
existing law; and that it is not interposed for any improper purpose, such as to harass or to cause
unnecessary delay or needless increase in the cost of litigation. If a pleading, motion or other
paper is not signed, it shall be stricken unless it is signed promptly after the omission is called to
the attention of the pleader or movant. If a pleading, motion or other paper is signed in violation
of this rule, the court, upon motion or upon its own initiative, shall impose upon the person who
signed it, a represented party, or both, an appropriate sanction, which may include an order to
pay to the other party or parties the amount of the reasonable expenses incurred because of the
filing of the pleading, including a reasonable attorney’s fee.
B. Verification of Pleading Generally. When in a family law action a pleading is required
to be verified by the affidavit of the party, or when in a family law action an affidavit is required
or permitted to be filed, the pleading may be verified, or the affidavit made, by the party or a
person acquainted with the facts.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 11, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
24Rule 32. Defenses and Objections; When and How Presented; By Pleading or Motion;
Motion for Judgment on Pleadings
A. When Presented.
1. A respondent shall serve and file a response within twenty (20) days after the
service of the summons and petition upon the respondent, except as otherwise provided
in Rule 42(J).
2. Unless a different time is fixed by court order, the service of a motion permitted
under this rule alters these periods of time; if the court denies the motion or postpones
its disposition until the trial on the merits, the responsive pleading shall be served
within ten (10) days after notice of the court’s action.
B. How Presented; Motion to Dismiss. Every defense, in law or fact, to a claim for relief in
any pleading, shall be asserted in the response if one is required, except that the following
defenses may at the option of the pleader be made by motion:
1. lack of jurisdiction over the subject matter;
2. lack of jurisdiction over the person;
3. improper venue;
4. insufficiency of process;
5. insufficiency of service of process; or
6. failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted.
A motion making any of these defenses shall be made before pleading if a further pleading
is permitted. No defense or objection is waived by being joined with one or more other defenses
or objections in a responsive pleading or motion. If a pleading sets forth a claim for relief to
which the adverse party is not required to serve a responsive pleading, the adverse party may
assert at the trial any defense in law or fact to that claim for relief. A defense of improper venue
may be made only if the action cannot be or could not have been transferred to the proper county
pursuant to A.R.S. § 12-404. If, on a motion asserting the defense to dismiss for failure of the
pleading to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, matters outside the pleading are
presented to and not excluded by the court, the motion shall be treated as one for summary
judgment and disposed of as provided in Rule 79, and all parties shall be given reasonable
opportunity to present all material made pertinent to such a motion by Rule 79.
C. Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings. After the pleadings are closed but within such
time as not to delay the trial, any party may move for judgment on the pleadings. If, on a motion
for judgment on the pleadings, matters outside the pleadings are presented to and not excluded
by the court, the motion shall be treated as one for summary judgment and disposed of as
provided in Rule 79, and all parties shall be given reasonable opportunity to present all material
made pertinent to such a motion by Rule 79.
25D. Preliminary Hearings. On application of any party, the defenses specifically
enumerated as 1 through 6 in paragraph B of this rule, whether made in a pleading or by motion,
and the motion for judgment mentioned in paragraph C of this rule shall be heard and determined
before trial, unless the court orders that the hearing and determination thereof be deferred until
the trial.
E. Motion to Strike. Upon motion made by a party before responding to a pleading or, if no
responsive pleading is permitted by these rules, upon motion made by a party within twenty (20)
days after service of the pleading upon the party or upon the court’s own initiative at any time,
the court may order stricken from a pleading any insufficient defense or any redundant,
immaterial, impertinent, or scandalous matter.
F. Waiver or Preservation of Certain Defenses. A party waives all defenses and
objections not presented either by motion or in that party’s answer or response, except:
1. a defense of lack of jurisdiction over the person, improper venue, insufficiency
of process, or insufficiency of service of process is waived unless it is made by motion
under this rule or included in a responsive pleading or an amendment thereof permitted
by Rule 34(A); and
2. a defense of failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted and an
objection of failure to state a legal defense to a claim may be made in any pleading
permitted or ordered under Rules 24 and 28, or by motion for judgment on the
pleadings, or at the trial on the merits.
G. Subject Matter Jurisdiction. Whenever it appears to the satisfaction of the court that it
lacks subject matter jurisdiction, the court shall dismiss the action.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 12, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 33. Counterclaims; Third Party Practice
A. A party to a family law case may file a statutory claim against another party, or against a
third party arising out of or related to the subject matter of the action by the filing of a separate
claim, counter-claim or third party petition, as appropriate, without prior leave of court provided
that said filing will not unduly delay or prejudice the adjudication of the rights of other parties to
the action. Service of any such claim, counter-claim or third party petition shall be as provided
by Rule 40, 41, or 42, as applicable.
B. A response to any claim, counter-claim or third party petition, shall be filed within the
time and in the manner required by these rules.
C. Upon timely application, the court may join additional parties necessary for the exercise
of its authority.
D. Upon timely application, the court may allow a third party to intervene in an action if
necessary for the exercise of the court’s authority, including, for the purpose of interpleader. The
26court, may, in its discretion, discharge the interpleader from liability to the parties, upon such
terms as the court may direct.
E. Misjoinder or non-joinder of parties is not grounds for dismissal of an action. Parties may
be dropped or added by order of the court on motion of any party or on the court’s own motion at
any stage of the action and on such terms as are just. The court may sever any claim against a
party, proceed separately with that claim, order separate trials, or make such other orders
necessary to prevent delay or prejudice.
F. Except as otherwise provided herein or by law, a party desiring joinder of another person,
or a person desiring to intervene shall serve a motion to join or a motion to intervene upon the
parties as provided in Rule 41 or 42, as applicable. The motion shall state the grounds therefor
and shall be accompanied by a pleading setting forth the claim, defense, or purpose for which
joinder or intervention is sought.
G. If the motion to join or intervene is granted, the petitioner and respondent shall be
allowed a reasonable time, not exceeding twenty (20) days, in which to respond to the pleading
of the intervener or party joined.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rules 13 and 14, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. Note that cross-
claims have been eliminated from family law practice.
Rule 34. Amended and Supplemental Pleadings
A. Amendments.
1. A party may amend the party’s pleading once as a matter of course at any time
before a responsive pleading is served or, if the pleading is one to which no responsive
pleading is permitted and the action has not been placed upon the trial calendar, the
party may so amend it at any time within twenty (20) days after it is served. Otherwise a
party may amend the party’s pleading only by leave of court or by written consent of
the adverse party. Leave to amend shall be freely given when justice requires.
2. A party shall plead in response to an amended pleading within the time
remaining for response to the original pleading or within ten (10) days after service of
the amended pleading, whichever period may be the longer, unless the court otherwise
orders.
B. Amendments to Conform to the Evidence. When issues not raised by the pleadings are
tried by express or implied consent of the parties, they shall be treated in all respects as if they
had been raised in the pleadings. Such amendment of the pleadings as may be necessary to cause
them to conform to the evidence and to raise these issues may be made upon motion of any party
at any time, even after judgment, but failure so to amend does not affect the result of the trial of
these issues. If evidence is objected to at the trial on the ground that it is not within the issues
raised in the pleadings, the court may allow the pleadings to be amended and shall do so freely
when the presentation of the merits of the action will be subserved thereby and the objecting
27party fails to satisfy the court that the admission of such evidence would prejudice the party in
maintaining the party’s action or defense upon the merits. The court may grant a continuance to
enable the objecting party to meet such evidence.
C. Relation Back of Amendments. Whenever the claim or defense asserted in the
amended pleading arose out of the conduct, transaction, or occurrence set forth or attempted to
be set forth in the original pleading, the amendment relates back to the date of the original
pleading. An amendment changing the party against whom a claim is asserted relates back if the
foregoing provision is satisfied and, within the period provided by law for commencing the
action against the party to be brought in by amendment, plus the period provided by Rule 40(I)
for service of the summons and petition, the party to be brought in by amendment (1) has
received such notice of the institution of the action that the party will not be prejudiced in
maintaining a defense on the merits, and (2) knew or should have known that, but for a mistake
concerning the identity of the proper party, the action would have been brought against the party.
D. Supplemental Pleadings. Upon motion of a party the court may, upon reasonable notice
and upon such terms as are just, permit the party to serve a supplemental pleading setting forth
transactions or occurrences or events which have happened since the date of the pleading sought
to be supplemented. Permission may be granted even though the original pleading is defective in
its statement of a claim for relief or defense. If the court deems it advisable that the adverse party
plead to the supplemental pleading, it shall so order, specifying the time therefor.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 15, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 35. Family Law Motion Practice
A. Formal Requirements; Time Periods.
1. The grounds for any motion shall be stated with particularity, and shall set forth
the relief or order which is sought. All written motions made before or after trial shall
be accompanied by a memorandum indicating, at a minimum, the precise legal points,
statutes and authorities relied on, citing the specific portions or pages thereof.
2. All motions shall be served on the opposing parties. Unless otherwise ordered by
the court, affidavits supporting the motion shall be filed and served together with the
motion.
3. Any party opposing the motion shall file any answering memorandum within ten
(10) days thereafter. An answering memorandum shall be titled “Response to
____________ (name of motion).”
4. Within five (5) days after service of the Response, the moving party may serve
and file a memorandum in reply, titled “Reply to ___________ (name of motion)”. The
reply shall be directed only to matters raised in the response.
285. Affidavits submitted in support of any response shall be filed and served together
with the response, unless the court permits them to be filed and served at some other
time. In its discretion, the trial court may waive these requirements as to motions made
in open court.
6. The time and manner of service of every motion, response and reply shall be
noted on all such documents, and shall be governed by Rule 43. If the precise manner in
which service has actually been made is not noted on any such filing, it will be
conclusively presumed that the filing was served by mail, and the provisions of Rule 46
shall apply. This conclusive presumption shall only apply if service in some form has
actually been made. The time periods specified in this paragraph shall not apply where
specific times for motions, affidavits or memoranda are otherwise provided by statute or
order of court.
7. The rules applicable to captions and other matters of form of pleadings apply to
all motions and other papers provided for by this rule, and all such motions and other
papers shall be signed in accordance with Rule 31.
B. Effect of Non-Compliance. If a motion does not conform in all substantial respects with
the requirements of this rule, or if the opposing party does not serve and file the required
response, or if counsel for any moving or opposing party fails to appear at the time and place
assigned for oral argument, such non-compliance may be deemed a consent to the denial or
granting of the motion, and the court may dispose of the motion summarily.
C. Oral Argument.
1. Any party may request, or the court may order on its own motion, a time and a
place for oral argument on any motion. The setting of oral argument is at the discretion
of the court.
2. To expedite its business, the court may make provision by order for the
submission and determination of motions, without oral hearing, upon brief written
statements of reasons in support and opposition.
3. If granted by the court, oral argument may be limited to a prescribed number of
minutes, which time shall not be exceeded without special permission in advance.
D. Motions for Reconsideration. A party seeking reconsideration of a ruling of the court
may file a motion for reconsideration. All motions for reconsideration, however titled, shall be
submitted without oral argument and without response or reply, unless the court otherwise
directs. No motion for reconsideration shall be granted, however, without the court providing an
opportunity for response. A motion authorized by this rule may not be employed as a substitute
for a motion pursuant to Rule 82(B), 83, or 86, and shall not operate to extend the time within
which a notice of appeal must be filed.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 7.1, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
29III. PARTIES
Rule 36. Real Party in Interest
Every action shall be prosecuted in the name of the real party in interest. A party authorized
by statute may sue in that person’s own name without joining the party for whose benefit the
action is brought; and when a statute of the state so provides, an action for the use or benefit of
another shall be brought in the name of the State of Arizona. No action shall be dismissed on the
ground that it is not prosecuted in the name of the real party in interest until a reasonable time
has been allowed after objection for ratification of commencement of the action by, or joinder or
substitution of, the real party in interest; and such ratification, joinder or substitution shall have
the same effect as if the action had been commenced in the name of the real party in interest.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 17, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 37. Substitution of Parties
A. Death.
1. If a party dies and the claim is not thereby extinguished, the court may order
substitution of the proper parties. The motion for substitution may be made by any party
or by the successors or representatives of the deceased party and, together with the
notice of hearing, shall be served on the parties as provided in Rule 43 and upon
persons not parties in the manner provided in Rule 40, 41, or 42, as applicable, for the
service of a summons. Unless the motion for substitution is made not later than 90 days
after the death is suggested upon the record by service of a statement of the fact of the
death as provided herein for the service of the motion, the action shall be dismissed as
to the deceased party.
2. In the event of the death of one or more of the petitioners or of one or more of
the respondents in an action in which the right sought to be enforced survives only to
the surviving petitioners or only against the surviving respondents, the action does not
abate. The death shall be suggested upon the record and the action shall proceed in
favor of or against the surviving parties.
B. Incompetence. If a party becomes incompetent, the court, upon motion served as
provided in paragraph A, may allow the action to be continued by or against the party’s
representative.
C. Transfer of Interest. In case of any transfer of interest, the action may be continued by
or against the original party, unless the court upon motion directs the person to whom the interest
is transferred to be substituted in the action or joined with the original party. Service of the
motion shall be made as provided in paragraph A.
30COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 25, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 38. Process on Behalf of and Against Persons Not Parties
When an order is made in favor of a person who is not a party to the action, that person may
enforce obedience to the order by the same process as if a party, and, when obedience to an order
may be lawfully enforced against a person who is not a party, that person is liable to the same
process for enforcing obedience to the order as if a party.
Rule 39. Proof of Authority by Attorney for Respondent Not Personally Served
In family law actions, an attorney appearing for a respondent who has not been personally
served shall file a responsive pleading or a notice of appearance.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is adapted from 80(f), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
31IV. SERVICE OF PROCESS
Rule 40. Process
A. Summons; Issuance. When the petition or any other pleading which requires service of a
summons is filed, the clerk shall endorse thereon the day and hour on which it was filed and the
number of the action, and shall forthwith issue a summons. The party filing the pleading may
present a summons to the clerk for signature and seal. If in proper form, the clerk shall sign and
seal the summons and issue it to the party for service or for delivery to a person authorized to
serve it under paragraph C. A summons, or a copy of the summons if addressed to multiple
persons, shall be issued for each person to be served.
B. Summons; Form; Replacement Summons. The summons shall be signed by the clerk,
be under the seal of the court, contain the name of the court and the names of the parties, be
directed to the person to be served, state the name and address of the attorney, if any, for the
party on whose behalf service is being made, and otherwise that party’s address. The summons
shall state the time within which these rules require the person being served to appear and
defend, and shall notify that person that in case of a failure to do so judgment by default will be
rendered against that person for the relief demanded in the pleading served. In an action for
annulment, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation, the summons shall also contain a
statement that either spouse, or both spouses, may file in the conciliation court a petition
invoking the jurisdiction of the court for the purpose of preserving the marriage by effecting
conciliation between the parties. A summons, or a copy of the summons in the case of multiple
persons to be served, shall be served together with a copy of the pleading to be served. If a
summons is returned without being served, or if it has been lost, the clerk may upon request issue
a replacement summons in the same form as the original. A replacement summons shall be
issued and served within the time prescribed by paragraph I of this rule. The summons shall state
that “requests for reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities must be made to the
court by parties at least three (3) working days in advance of a scheduled court proceeding.”
C. Process; By Whom Served. Service of process shall be by a sheriff, a sheriff’s deputy, a
private process server registered with the clerk of the court pursuant to paragraph D, or any other
person specially appointed by the court, except that a subpoena may be served as provided in
Rule 52. Service of process may also be made by a party or that party’s attorney where expressly
authorized by these rules. A private process server or specially appointed person shall be not less
than 21 years of age and shall not be a party, an attorney, or the employee of an attorney in the
action whose process is being served. Special appointments to serve process shall be requested
by motion to the presiding judge, and the court’s ruling shall be recorded by minute entry.
Special appointments shall be granted freely, are valid only for the cause specified in the motion,
and do not constitute an appointment as a registered private process server.
D. State-wide Registration of Private Process Servers. A person who files with the clerk
of the court an application approved by the Supreme Court, stating that the applicant has been a
bona fide resident of the State of Arizona for at least one year immediately preceding the
application and that the applicant will well and faithfully serve process in accordance with the
law, and who otherwise complies with the procedures set forth by the Supreme Court in its
Administrative Order regarding this subsection, shall, upon approval of the court or presiding
32judge thereof, in the county where the application is filed, be registered with the clerk as a
private process server until such approval is withdrawn by the court in its discretion. The clerk
shall maintain a register for this purpose. Such private process server shall be entitled to serve in
such capacity for any court of the state anywhere within the State.
E. Service of Summons in Title IV-D Cases. Following registration in compliance with
paragraph D, a Field Locate Investigator employed by the Department of Economic Security’s
Office of Special Investigations may complete service in the manner set forth in Rule 41(C) in
any action initiated by the State for the determination of paternity or the establishment,
modification, or enforcement of an order of support.
F. Service; Acceptance or Waiver; Voluntary Appearance. The person to whom a
summons or other process is directed may accept service, or waive issuance or service thereof in
writing, dated and signed by that person, and subscribed and sworn to (or affirmed to) before a
notary public, and the acceptance or waiver shall be filed with the clerk. Instead of notarization,
the person may sign the acceptance or waiver in the presence of the clerk after verification of the
person’s identity by the clerk. If the person is represented by counsel, counsel may sign the
acceptance or waiver. A person upon whom service is required may, in person or by attorney or
by an authorized agent, enter an appearance in open court, and the appearance shall be noted by
the clerk upon the docket and entered in the minutes. Such waiver, acceptance or appearance
shall have the same force and effect as if a summons had been issued and served. The filing of a
pleading responsive to a pleading allowed under Rule 24 shall constitute an appearance.
G. Return of Service. If service is not accepted or waived, then the person effecting service
shall make proof thereof to the court. When the process is served by a sheriff or a sheriff’s
deputy, the return shall be officially endorsed on or attached thereto and returned to the court
promptly. If served by a person other than the sheriff or a deputy sheriff, return and proof of
service shall be made promptly by affidavit thereof. Each such affidavit of a registered private
process server shall include clear reference to the county where that private process server is
registered. When the summons is served by publication, the return of the person making such
service shall be made in the manner specified in Rules 41 and 42. Proof of service in a place not
within any judicial district of the United States shall, if effected under Rule 42(F)(1), be made
pursuant to the applicable treaty or convention. If effected under Rule 42(F)(2) or (F)(3), proof
of service shall include a receipt signed by the addressee or other evidence of delivery to the
addressee satisfactory to the court. In any event, the return shall be made within the time during
which the person served must respond to process. Failure to make proof of service does not
affect the validity thereof.
H. Amendment of Process or Amendment of Proof of Service. At any time, in its
discretion and upon such terms as it deems just, the court may allow any process or proof of
service thereof to be amended, unless it clearly appears that material prejudice would result to
the substantial rights of the party against whom the process issued.
I. Summons; Time Limit for Service. If service of the summons and petition is not made
upon a respondent within one hundred twenty (120) days after the filing of the petition, the court,
upon motion or on its own initiative after notice to the petitioner, shall dismiss the action without
prejudice as to that respondent or direct that service be effected within a specified time; provided
that if the petitioner shows good cause for the failure, the court shall extend the time for service
33for an appropriate period. This subdivision does not apply to service in a foreign country
pursuant to Rules 42(F), (G), (H) and (I).
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 4, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 41. Service of Process within Arizona
A. Territorial Limits of Effective Service. All process may be served anywhere within the
territorial limits of the state.
B. Summons; Service with Petition. The summons, pleading and other documents being
served shall be served together. The party procuring service is responsible for service of a
summons, the pleading and other documents being served within the time allowed under Rule
40(I) and shall furnish the person effecting service with the necessary copies of the pleading to
be served.
C. Service of Summons upon Individuals.
1. Personal Service. Service upon an individual from whom a waiver has not been
obtained and filed, other than those specified in paragraphs D, E, and F, shall be
effected by delivering a copy of the summons, pleading and other documents being
served to that individual personally or by leaving copies thereof at that individual’s
dwelling house or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion
then residing therein or by delivering a copy of the summons, pleading and other
documents being served to an agent authorized by appointment or by law to receive
service of process, except as otherwise provided in subdivision C(2) of this rule.
2. Service by Mail or National Courier Service; Return. When the location of a
party is within the state, service may be made by depositing, with delivery charges
prepaid, the summons and a copy of the pleading and other documents being served
with the United States Postal Service or any other national courier service that provides
delivery and signature confirmation or certified mail, signed return receipt, to be sent to
the person to be served. Service under this rule and the return or confirmation of service
may be made by the party procuring service or by that party’s attorney. Service in this
manner is only effective if the return receipt or signature confirmation is signed by the
party to be served. Upon receiving from the U.S. Postal Service or other national
courier service the signed return receipt, or a copy of the signature confirmation and
cash register receipt or package label of the person being served, the serving party shall
file an affidavit with the court stating:
a. that the summons and a copy of the pleading and other document being
served were dispatched to the party being served;
b. that such papers were in fact received by the party as evidenced by the
receipt, or copy of the signature confirmation containing the signature of the
34party served and cash register receipt or package label, a copy of which shall
be attached to the affidavit; and
c. the date of receipt by the party being served and the date of the return of
the receipt or signature confirmation to the sender.
This affidavit shall be prima facie evidence of personal service of the summons, the
pleading and other documents to be served. Service shall be deemed complete and time
shall begin to run for the purposes of paragraph J of this rule from the date of receipt by
the party being served, provided that no default may be had on such service until the
required affidavit has been filed.
D. Service of Summons upon Minors. Service upon a minor under the age of sixteen years
shall be effected by service in the manner set forth in paragraph C of this rule upon the minor
and upon the minor’s father, mother or guardian, within this state, or if none is found therein,
then upon any person having the care and control of such minor, or with whom the minor
resides.
E. Service of Summons upon a Minor with Guardian or Conservator. Service upon a
minor for whom a guardian or conservator has been appointed in this state shall be effected by
service in the manner set forth in paragraph C of this rule upon such guardian or conservator and
minor.
F. Service of Summons upon Incompetent Persons. Service upon a person who has been
judicially declared to be insane, gravely disabled, incapacitated or mentally incompetent to
manage that person’s property and for whom a guardian or conservator has been appointed in
this state shall be effected by service in the manner set forth in paragraph C of this rule upon
such person and also upon that person’s guardian or conservator, or if no guardian or conservator
has been appointed, upon such person as the court designates.
G. Service of Summons upon the State. Service upon the state shall be effected by
acceptance or waiver of service, or by delivering a copy of the summons and of the pleading to
the attorney general.
H. Service of Summons upon a County, Municipal Corporation or Other
Governmental Subdivision. Service upon a county or a municipal corporation or other
governmental subdivision of the state subject to suit, and from which a waiver has not been
obtained and filed, shall be effected by delivering a copy of the summons and of the pleading to
the chief executive officer, the secretary, clerk, or recording officer thereof.
I. Service of Summons upon Other Governmental Entities. Service upon any
governmental entity not listed above shall be effected by serving the person, officer, group or
body responsible for the administration of that entity or by serving the appropriate legal officer,
if any, representing the entity. Service upon any person who is a member of the “group” or
“body” responsible for the administration of the entity shall be sufficient.
J. Service of Summons upon Corporations, Partnerships or Other Unincorporated
Associations. Service upon a domestic or foreign corporation or upon a partnership or other
unincorporated association which is subject to suit in a common name, and from which a waiver
35has not been obtained and filed, shall be effected by delivering a copy of the summons and of the
pleading to a partner, an officer, a managing or general agent, or to any other agent authorized by
appointment or by law to receive service of process and, if the agent is one authorized by statute
to receive service and the statute so requires, by also mailing a copy to the party on whose behalf
the agent accepted or received service.
K. Service of Summons Upon a Domestic Corporation If Authorized Officer or Agent
Not Found Within the State. When a domestic corporation does not have an officer or agent in
this state upon which legal service of process can be made, service upon such domestic
corporation shall be effected by depositing two (2) copies of the summons and of the pleading
being served in the office of the Corporation Commission, which shall be deemed personal
service on such corporation. The return of the sheriff of the county in which the action or
proceeding is brought that after diligent search or inquiry the sheriff has been unable to find any
officer or agent of such corporation upon whom process may be served, shall be prima facie
evidence that the corporation does not have such an officer or agent in this state. The
Corporation Commission shall file one of the copies in its office and immediately mail the other
copy, postage prepaid, to the office of the corporation, or to the president, secretary or any
director or officer of such corporation as appears or is ascertained by the Corporation
Commission from the articles of incorporation or other papers on file in its office, or otherwise.
L. Alternative or Substituted Service. If service by one of the means set forth in the
preceding paragraphs of this rule proves impracticable, then service may be accomplished in
such manner, other than by publication, as the court, upon motion and without notice, may direct.
Whenever the court allows an alternative or substitute form of service pursuant to this subpart,
reasonable efforts shall be undertaken by the party making service to assure that actual notice of
the commencement of the action is provided to the person to be served and, in any event, the
summons and the pleading to be served, as well as any order of the court authorizing an
alternative method of service, shall be mailed to the last known business or residence address of
the person to be served. Service by publication may be employed only under the circumstances,
and in accordance with the procedures, specified in paragraph M of this rule and Rule 42(D).
M. Service by Publication; Return. Service by publication is not sufficient to confer
jurisdiction upon the court to determine issues of paternity, child support, spousal maintenance,
division of marital property, or any other issue requiring personal jurisdiction over a party. In
actions involving dissolution of a marriage, custody, or any other issue not requiring personal
jurisdiction over a party, and where the person to be served is one whose residence is unknown
to the party seeking service but whose last known residence address was within the state, or has
avoided service of process, and service by publication is the best means practicable under the
circumstances for providing notice of the institution of the action, then service may be made by
publication in accordance with the requirements of this subpart. Such service shall be made by
publication of the summons, and of a statement as to the manner in which a copy of the pleading
being served may be obtained, at least once a week for four successive weeks (1) in a newspaper
published in the county where the action is pending, and (2) in a newspaper published in the
county of the last known residence of the person to be served, if different from the county where
the action is pending. If no newspaper is published in any such county, then the required
publications shall be made in a newspaper published in an adjoining county. The service shall be
complete thirty days after the first publication. When the residence of the person to be served is
known, the party or officer making service shall also, on or before the date of the first
36publication, mail the summons and a copy of the pleading and other documents being served,
postage prepaid, to that person at that person’s place of residence. Service by publication and the
return thereof may be made by the party procuring service or that party’s attorney in the same
manner as though made by an officer. The party or officer making service shall file an affidavit
showing the manner and dates of the publication and mailing, and the circumstances warranting
the utilization of the procedure authorized by this subpart, which shall be prima facie evidence of
compliance herewith. A printed copy of the publication shall accompany the affidavit. If the
residence of the party being served is unknown, and for that reason no mailing was made, the
affidavit shall so state.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 4.1, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. Rules 41(M) and 42(D) are
intended to require personal service prior to the court adjudicating issues of paternity, child
support, spousal maintenance, division of marital property or any other issue that does require
personal jurisdiction over the parties. Taylor v. Jarrett, 191 Ariz. 550, 959 F. 2d 807 (App.
1998). Service by publication is sufficient for the court to dissolve a marriage, enter custody
orders and resolve any other in rem or quasi in rem issue that does not require personal
jurisdiction. This rule does not follow the holding in Master Financial, Inc. v. Woodburn, 208
Ariz. 70, 90 P.3d 1236 (App. 2004), applicable to Rule 4.1, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 42. Service of Process Outside of State
A. Extraterritorial Jurisdiction; Personal Service Out of State. A court of this state may
exercise personal jurisdiction over parties, whether found within or outside the state, to the
maximum extent permitted by the constitution of this state and the Constitution of the United
States. Service upon any such party located outside the state may be made as provided in this
rule and when so made shall be of the same effect as personal service within the state.
B. Direct Service. Service of process may be made outside the state but within the United
States in the same manner provided in Rule 41(C) through (K) by a person authorized to serve
process under the law of the state where such service is made. Such service shall be complete
when made, and time for purposes of paragraph J of this rule shall begin to run at that time,
provided that before any default may be had on such service, there shall be filed an affidavit of
service showing the circumstances warranting the utilization of this procedure and attaching an
affidavit of the process server showing the fact and circumstances of the service.
C. Service by Mail or National Courier Service; Return. When the location of a party
outside the state is known, service may be made by depositing, with delivery charges prepaid, the
summons and a copy of the pleading and other documents being served with the United States
Postal Service or any other national courier service that provides delivery and signature
confirmation or certified mail, signed return receipt, to be sent to the person to be served.
Service under this rule and the return or confirmation of service may be made by the party
procuring service or by that party’s attorney. Service in this manner is only effective if the return
receipt or signature confirmation is signed by the party to be served. Upon receiving from the
U.S. Postal Service or other national courier service the signed return receipt, or a copy of the
signature confirmation and cash register receipt or package label of the person being served, the
serving party shall file an affidavit with the court stating:
371. that the party being served is known to be located outside the state;
2. that the summons and a copy of the pleading and other document being served
were dispatched to the party being served;
3. that such papers were in fact received by the party as evidenced by the receipt or
copy of the signature confirmation and cash register receipt or package label, a copy of
which shall be attached to the affidavit; and
4. the date of receipt by the party being served and the date of the return of the
receipt or signature confirmation to the sender.
This affidavit shall be prima facie evidence of personal service of the summons, the
pleading and other documents to be served. Service shall be deemed complete and time
shall begin to run for the purposes of paragraph J of this rule from the date of receipt by
the party being served, provided that no default may be had on such service until the
required affidavit has been filed.
D. Service by Publication; Return. Service by publication is not sufficient to confer
jurisdiction upon the court to determine issues of paternity, child support, spousal maintenance,
division of marital property, or any other issue requiring personal jurisdiction over a party. In
actions involving dissolution of a marriage, custody or any other issue not requiring personal
jurisdiction over a party, and where the person to be served is one whose present residence is
unknown but whose last known residence was outside the state or has avoided service of process,
and service by publication is the best means practicable under the circumstances for providing
notice of institution of the action, then service may be made by publication in accordance with
the requirements of this subpart. Such service shall be made by publication of the summons and
of a statement as to the manner in which a copy of the pleading and other documents being
served may be obtained at least once per week for four successive weeks in a newspaper
published in the county where the action is pending. If no newspaper is published in any such
county, then the required publications shall be made in a newspaper published in an adjoining
county. The service shall be complete thirty days after the first publication. When the residence
of the person to be served is known, the party or officer making service shall also, on or before
the date of the first publication, mail the summons, a copy of the pleading and other documents
being served, postage prepaid, directed to that person at that person’s place of residence.
Service by publication and the return thereof may be made by the party procuring service or
that party’s attorney in the same manner as though made by an officer. The party or officer
making service shall file an affidavit showing the manner and dates of publication and mailing
and the circumstances warranting utilization of the procedure authorized by this subpart, which
shall be prima facie evidence of compliance herewith. A printed copy of the publication shall
accompany the affidavit. If the residence of the person to be served is unknown, and for that
reason no mailing was made, the affidavit shall so state.
E. Service of Summons Upon Corporations, Partnerships or Unincorporated
Associations Located Outside Arizona but Within the United States. Where the corporation
or partnership or unincorporated association to be served is located outside the state but within
38the United States, service under this rule shall be made on one of the persons specified in Rule
41(J).
F. Service upon Individuals in a Foreign Country. Unless otherwise provided by federal
law, service upon an individual from whom a waiver has not been obtained and filed, other than
a minor or an incompetent person, may be effected in a place not within any judicial district of
the United States:
1. by any internationally agreed means reasonably calculated to give notice, such as
those means authorized by the Hague Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and
Extrajudicial Documents; or
2. if there is no internationally agreed means of service or the applicable
international agreement allows other means of service, provided that service is
reasonably calculated to give notice:
a. in the manner prescribed by the law of the foreign country for service in
that country in an action in any of its courts of general jurisdiction; or
b.as directed by the foreign authority in response to a letter rogatory or
letter of request; or
c. unless prohibited by the law of the foreign country, by
1) delivery to the party to be served personally of a copy of the
summons and of the pleading; or
2) any form of mail requiring a signed receipt, to be addressed and
dispatched by the clerk of the court to the party to be served; or
3) by other means not prohibited by international agreement, as may
be directed by the court.
G. Service of Summons Upon Minors and Incompetent Persons in a Foreign Country.
Service upon a minor, a minor with a guardian or an incompetent person in a place not within
any judicial district of the United States shall be effected in the manner prescribed by subdivision
(2)(a) or (2)(b) of paragraph F of this rule, or by such means as the court may direct.
H. Service of Summons Upon Corporation and Associations in a Foreign Country.
Unless otherwise provided by federal law, service upon a corporation or upon a partnership or
other unincorporated association that is subject to suit under a common name, and from which a
waiver of service has not been obtained and filed, shall be effected in a place not within any
judicial district of the United States in any manner prescribed for individuals by paragraph F of
this rule except personal delivery as provided in subdivision (2)(c)(1) thereof.
I. Service of Summons upon a Foreign State or Political Subdivision Thereof. Service of
a summons upon a foreign state or a political subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof
shall be effected pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1608.
39J. Time for Appearance after Service Outside State. Where service of the summons and
copy of a pleading and other documents required to be served is made outside the state by any
means authorized by this rule, the person served shall appear and answer within thirty (30) days
after completion thereof in the same manner and under the same penalties as if that person had
been personally served with a summons within the county in which the action is pending.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 4.2, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. Rule 41(M) and Rule
42(D) are intended to require personal service prior to the court adjudicating issues of paternity,
child support, spousal maintenance, division of marital property or any other issue that does
require personal jurisdiction over the parties. Taylor v. Jarrett, 191 Ariz. 550, 959 F. 2d 807
(App. 1998). Service by publication is sufficient for the court to dissolve a marriage, enter
custody orders and resolve any other in rem or quasi in rem issue that does not require personal
jurisdiction. This rule does not follow the holding in Master Financial, Inc. v. Woodburn, 208
Ariz. 70, 90 P.3d 1236 (App. 2004), applicable to Rule 4.1, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
The purpose of paragraph C is to allow service out-of-state not only through the U.S. Postal
Service, but also through other national courier services, such as Federal Express, DHL and
United Parcel Service, which provide service and delivery of parcels with signature confirmation
of delivery. These services provide for on-line tracking of parcels and signature confirmation,
which can be viewed and printed from a computer.
Rule 43. Service and Filing of Pleadings and Other Papers; Sensitive Data Form
A. Service: When Required. Except as otherwise provided in these rules, every order
required by its terms to be served, every pleading subsequent to the original petition, every paper
relating to discovery required to be served upon a party unless the court otherwise orders, every
written motion other than one which may be heard ex parte, and every written notice,
appearance, demand, offer of judgment, designation of record on appeal, and similar paper shall
be served upon each of the parties. No service need be made on parties in default for failure to
appear except that pleadings asserting new or additional claims for relief against them shall be
served upon them in the manner provided for service of summons in Rules 40, 41, and 42, as
applicable.
B. Service; Parties Served; Continuance. When there are several respondents, and some
are served with summons and others are not, the petitioner may proceed against those served or
continue the action. The court may order the petitioner to proceed against those served.
C. Service after Appearance; Service after Judgment; How Made.
1. Whenever service is required or permitted to be made upon a party represented
by an attorney, the service shall be made upon the attorney unless service upon the party
is ordered by the court, except for petitions for contempt, orders of protection and
injunctions against harassment, which must be served pursuant to Rules 41 and 42.
Service upon the attorney or upon a party shall be made by delivering a copy to the
attorney or party or by mailing it to the attorney or party at the attorney’s or party’s last
known address, or, if no address is known, by leaving it with the clerk of the court.
40Delivery of a copy within this rule means: handing it to the attorney or to the party; or
leaving it at the attorney’s or party’s office with a clerk or other person in charge
thereof; or, if there is no one in charge, leaving it in a conspicuous place therein; or, if
the office is closed or the person to be served has no office, leaving it at the person’s
dwelling-house or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion
then residing therein; or by facsimile to a facsimile number provided by the attorney or
party and by retaining a receipt documenting the date and time of the facsimile
transmission. The date and manner of service shall be noted on the original of the paper
served or in a separate certificate filed with the court. If the precise manner in which
service has actually been made is not so noted, it will be conclusively presumed that the
filing was served by mail, and the provisions of Rule 4(D) shall apply. This conclusive
presumption shall only apply if service in some form has actually been made. Service
by mail is complete upon mailing.
2. After the time for appeal from a judgment has expired or a judgment has become
final after appeal, the service of a motion, petition, or other pleading required to be
served and requests for modification, vacation, or enforcement of that judgment shall be
served pursuant to Rules 40, 41 and 42, as applicable, as if serving a summons and
petition.
D. Filing; Attachments; Public Access.
1. Filing. All papers after the petition required to be served upon a party or to be
filed with the court within a specified time shall be both filed with the clerk of the court
and served within that specified time.
2. Papers Not to Be Filed. The following papers shall not be filed separately and
may be filed as attachments or exhibits to other documents only when relevant to the
determination of an issue before the court:
a. Subpoena Papers. Any praecipe used solely for issuance of a subpoena
or subpoena duces tecum, any subpoena or subpoena duces tecum, and any
affidavit of service of a subpoena, except for post-judgment proceedings.;
b. Discovery Papers. Notices of deposition; depositions, interrogatories
and answers; requests for production, inspection or admission, and responses;
requests for physical and mental examination; and notices of service of any
discovery or discovery response;
c. Proposed Pleadings. Any proposed pleading, except such pleading may
be filed after ruling by the court if necessary to preserve the record on appeal;
d. Prior Filings. Any paper that has previously been filed in the case (if a
party desires to call the court’s attention to anything contained in a previously
filed paper, the party shall do so by incorporation by reference); and
e. Authorities Cited In Memoranda. Copies of authorities cited in
memoranda, unless necessary to preserve the record on appeal.
413. Attachments to Judge. Except for proposed orders and proposed judgments, a
party may attach copies of papers not otherwise to be filed under this rule to a copy of a
motion or memorandum of points and authorities delivered to the judge to whom the
case has been assigned. Any such papers provided to the judge must also be provided to
all other parties.
4. Sanctions. For violation of this rule, the court may order the removal of the
offending document and charge the offending party or counsel such costs or fees as may
be necessary to cover the clerk’s costs of filing, preservation, or storage, and the court
may impose any additional sanctions provided in Rule 76(D).
5. Public Access. By administrative order of the presiding judge or local rule, upon
commencement of an action, the filing of a pleading pursuant to Rule 24 or the filing of a
Petition for an Order of Protection or a Petition for Injunction Against Harassment, all
court documents, records and evidence related thereto shall be unavailable to the general
public until the affidavit of service thereof is filed, or forty-five (45) days have passed
since the filing of the petition with the court, whichever occurs first. The foregoing
notwithstanding, judicial officers, court and clerk’s office personnel, case parties and their
associated attorneys of record, and any other persons as ordered by the court may have
access to the documents in a manner determined by the clerk of court at any time.
E. Filing with the Court Defined. The filing of pleadings and other papers with the court as
required by these rules shall be made by filing them with the clerk of the court, except that the
judge may permit the papers to be filed with the judge and, in that event, the judge shall note
thereon the filing date and forthwith transmit them to the clerk of the court.
F. Proposed Orders and Judgments. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in these
rules, a proposed order or proposed decree shall be prepared as a separate document and shall not
be included as an integral part of a motion, stipulation, or other document. The proposed order or
proposed decree shall be prepared in accordance with this paragraph and Rule 30(D), and shall
contain the following information as single-spaced text on the first page of the document:
1. to the left of the center of the page starting at line one, the filing party’s printed
name, address, telephone number, State Bar of Arizona attorney identification number,
and any State Bar of Arizona law firm identification number, along with an
identification of the party being represented by the attorney, e.g., petitioner, respondent,
third party petitioner, etc. (note: if the document is being presented by a litigant
representing himself or herself, all of this information shall be included except the State
Bar of Arizona identification numbers);
2. centered on or below line six (6) of the page, the printed title of the court;
3. below the title of the court and to the left of the center of the paper, the printed
title of the action or proceeding;
4. opposite the title, in the space to the right of the center of the page, the printed
case number of the action or proceeding; and
425. immediately below the case number, a brief printed description of the nature of
the document.
There shall be at least two (2) lines of text on the signature page. Any proposed form of
order or proposed form of judgment shall be served upon all parties and counsel
simultaneous with its submission to the court for consideration. Proposed orders and
proposed judgments shall not be filed or docketed by the clerk of the court until after
judicial review and decision to sign, modify or reject. A party may file an unsigned
order or judgment to preserve the record on appeal.
G. Sensitive Data.
1. Filing Sensitive Data.
a. Before filing any paper containing sensitive data with the court, the
filing party shall omit or otherwise redact the sensitive data unless they are
specifically requested by the court. If the sensitive data are specifically
requested by the court, the filer shall record the requested information on a
separate sensitive data form which shall be maintained by the clerk as a
confidential record. In the discretion of the clerk, sensitive data forms and
orders of assignment may be maintained either in paper or electronic format.
If these documents are maintained electronically, the clerk is authorized to
destroy the paper version. Unless the court orders otherwise, any further
written reference to sensitive data shall thereafter be made by referring to a
corresponding item number on the sensitive data form or other means, rather
than inserting the actual data into the document being filed with the court.
b. Whenever new information is needed to supplement the record in a
case, the parties shall file an updated sensitive data form, reflecting all
previously disclosed sensitive data plus any additional sensitive data required
to be filed in the case.
c. Orders of Assignment shall contain any sensitive data required by law,
but shall be closed and only available to the parties, the parties’ employers,
child support enforcement agencies, court personnel, and any other person or
agency authorized by court order.
d. The provisions of subdivision 1(a) shall not pertain to orders or decrees,
or to petitions and accompanying documents filed pursuant to the Uniform
Interstate Family Support Act (UIFSA) as adopted by the state of Arizona.
e. If a document containing sensitive information is filed with a court, any
party may request that the court order that the document be sealed or removed
from the file.
2. Sensitive Data Defined. For purposes of this rule, “sensitive data” means social
security numbers, bank account numbers, credit card numbers, and other financial
account numbers.
433. Sensitive Data Form. The Sensitive Data Form, provided in Rule 97, Form 3, or
a substantially similar form, shall be used.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 5, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
44V. DEFAULT DECREE, CONSENT DECREE, AND DISMISSAL
Rule 44. Default Decree
A. Application and Entry. When a party against whom a judgment for affirmative relief is
sought has failed to respond or otherwise defend as provided by these rules, the clerk shall enter
that party's default in accordance with the procedures set forth below. All requests for entry of
default shall be by written application to the clerk of the court in which the matter is pending.
1. Notice.
a. To the Party. When the whereabouts of the party claimed to be in
default are known by the party requesting the entry of default, a copy of the
application for entry of default shall be mailed to the party claimed to be in
default.
b. Represented Party. When a party claimed to be in default is known by
the party requesting the entry of default to be represented by an attorney,
whether or not that attorney has formally appeared, a copy of the application
shall also be sent to the attorney for the party claimed to be in default. Nothing
herein shall be construed to create any obligation to undertake any affirmative
effort to determine the existence or identity of counsel representing the party
claimed to be in default.
c. Whereabouts of Unrepresented Party Unknown. If the whereabouts of a
party claimed to be in default are unknown to the party requesting the entry of
default and the identity of counsel for that party is also not known to the
requesting party, the application for entry of default shall so state and shall be
mailed to the unrepresented party’s last known address.
2. Effective Date of Default. A default entered by the clerk shall be effective ten
(10) days after the filing of the application for entry of default.
3. Effect of Responsive Pleading. A default shall not become effective if the party
claimed to be in default pleads or otherwise defends as provided by these rules prior to
the expiration of ten (10) days from the filing of the application for entry of default.
4. Applicability. The provisions of this rule requiring notice prior to the entry of
default shall apply only to a default sought and entered pursuant to this rule.
B. Judgment by Default. Judgment by default may be entered as follows:
1. By Motion without Hearing.
a. When the petitioner’s claim against a respondent is for a sum certain or
for a sum that can by computation be made certain, the court upon motion of
the petitioner and upon affidavit of the amount due shall enter judgment for
that amount and costs against the respondent, if the respondent has been
45defaulted for failure to appear and is not a minor or incompetent person. If the
claim states a specific sum of attorneys' fees that will be sought in the event
judgment is rendered by default, and if such award is allowed by law and is
supported by the affidavit, the judgment may include an award of reasonable
attorneys' fees not to exceed the amount of the demand therefore. If the claim
requests an award of attorneys’ fees, but fails to specify the amount of such
fees that will be sought in the event judgment is rendered by default, the
judgment may include an award of attorneys' fees, if such an award is allowed
by law and the reasonable amount therefor is established by affidavit, where
the respondent has not entered an appearance in the action.
b. When a petition for legal separation, dissolution, or annulment of
marriage has been filed, a decree may be entered upon motion supported by
the affidavit of either or both parties to the marriage, provided that:
1) there are no minor children of the relationship of the parties born
before or during the marriage or adopted by the parties during the
marriage, and the wife, to affiant's knowledge, is not pregnant; and
2) the parties waive any right to spousal maintenance.
The supporting affidavit shall set forth facts showing that jurisdictional
requirements have been met and that the provisions of A.R.S. § 25-381.09
have been met or do not apply. The affidavit shall also set forth factual
statements supporting the relief requested in the proceeding, including an
award of attorneys’ fees, if applicable. A default decree under this rule is not
available if the adverse party is a minor or incompetent person, or if the
adverse party has otherwise appeared and default has not been entered for
failure to appear unless the parties have agreed that the matter may proceed as
if by default.
c. When a petition to establish maternity or paternity has been filed, a
judgment may be entered upon motion supported by an affidavit or affidavits
of the state or the mother or the father. In cases where the default judgment is
requested by the state, the factual basis for the finding of paternity shall be
established by the affidavit of a parent. The supporting affidavit(s) shall set
forth facts showing that jurisdictional requirements have been met and that a
default order is appropriate pursuant to A.R.S. § 25-813. If entry of an order
for current and past support is requested, the motion shall be accompanied by
child support worksheets to support the amounts requested and the supporting
affidavit shall state the basis for the determination(s) of the gross income of the
defaulting parent. The affidavit shall also set forth facts supporting any other
relief requested.
2. By Hearing. In all other cases the party entitled to a judgment shall apply to the
court therefore, but no judgment by default shall be entered against a minor or an
incompetent person unless represented in the action by a guardian, or other such
representative who has appeared therein. If the party against whom judgment by default
46is sought has appeared in the action, that party or, if appearing by representative, that
party's representative shall be served with written notice of the application for judgment
at least three (3) days prior to the hearing on such application. If, in order to enable the
court to enter judgment or to carry it into effect, it is necessary to take an account or to
determine the relief to be granted, or to establish the truth of any statement by evidence
or to make an investigation of any other matter, the court may conduct such hearings or
order such references as it deems necessary and proper. The defaulted party is in the
position of having admitted each and every material allegation of the petition.
Once a defaulted respondent has made a motion under the provisions of this rule,
the trial court shall allow respondent to participate in the hearing to determine what, if
any, is appropriate relief to be awarded petitioner pursuant to the Petition, or to establish
the truth of any statement.
C. Setting Aside Default. For good cause shown the court may set aside an entry of default
and, if a judgment by default has been entered, may likewise set it aside in accordance with Rule
85(C).
D. Petitioners, Counterclaimants. The provisions of this rule apply whether the party
entitled to the judgment by default is a petitioner, a third-party petitioner, or a party who has
pleaded a counterclaim.
E. Judgment against the State. No judgment by default shall be entered against the state or
an officer or agency thereof unless the claimant establishes a claim or right to relief by evidence
satisfactory to the court.
F. Judgment When Service by Publication; Statement of Evidence. Where service of
process has been made by publication and no answer has been filed within the time prescribed by
law, judgment shall be rendered as in other cases, but a record of the proceedings, in a form
approved by the court, shall be filed as a part of the record maintained on a tangible medium or
that is stored in any electronic or other medium and that is retrievable in perceivable form.
G. Request for Judgment. A judgment by default shall not be different in kind from or
exceed the amount requested in the pleadings. Except as to a party against whom a judgment is
entered by default, every final judgment shall grant the relief to which the party in whose favor it
is rendered is entitled, consistent with the best interests of the child(ren), even if the party has not
requested such relief in the party’s pleadings, except that awards of spousal maintenance and for
attorneys’ fees must be specifically pled for such relief to be granted through a default judgment.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 55, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 45. Consent Decree, Order, or Judgment Without Hearing
A. General. Whenever the petitioner and respondent agree to the terms of a legal separation,
annulment, dissolution, paternity, or maternity action, the parties may elect to proceed by
Consent Decree, Order, or Judgment without hearing, upon a showing that the required
47appearance fees have been paid or deferred. Additionally, for a dissolution or legal separation,
sixty (60) days must have passed since the service of process or acceptance of service prior to the
submission of the Consent Decree. To proceed with a Consent Decree of Dissolution of
Marriage, the parties shall jointly submit a Consent Decree substantially in compliance with Rule
97, Form 8 and shall state the terms upon which the parties have agreed. The judge or
commissioner assigned to the case shall determine whether the parties have met the requirements
for a Decree, Order, or Judgment by consent.
B. Decree, Order, or Judgment. The Decree, Order, or Judgment shall comply with the
requirements of this paragraph B.
1. If a party is represented by counsel, counsel shall sign the Decree, Order, or
Judgment, and if a party is not represented by counsel, the party shall sign the Decree,
Order, or Judgment.
2. If any party is receiving benefits under Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families (TANF) (formerly AFDC) or the Title IV-D program, the parties shall obtain
the written approval of the Attorney General for any specified child support amount.
3. In any action for dissolution, annulment, or legal separation, the parties shall
indicate the following:
a. whether the marriage is or was a covenant marriage;
b. whether there are children common to the parties; and
c. whether the wife is pregnant with a child common to the parties.
4. The Consent Decree, Order, or Judgment shall state that: (a) the parties agree to
proceed by consent; (b) each party believes no duress or coercion is involved; (c) for
any dissolution or legal separation, each party believes that any division of property is
fair and equitable; (d) each party understands that he or she (i) may retain or has
retained legal counsel of his or her choice and (ii) is waiving the right to trial; and (e)
the effect, if any, on any existing protective orders. The Consent Decree, Order or
Judgment shall also state the effect thereof, if any, on any protective orders.
5. The Consent Decree, Order, or Judgment shall be dated and signed by both
parties, and the signature of each party shall be subscribed and sworn to (or affirmed to)
before a notary public. Instead of notarization, the person may sign the consent decree
in the presence of the clerk after verification of the person’s identity by the clerk. If a
party is represented by counsel, counsel also shall sign the Consent Decree.
C. When Children Are Involved. When there are children common to the parties, the
parties shall include the following:
1. provision for custody and parenting time by a separate parenting plan or
within the Consent Decree, Order, or Judgment;
482. a separate or incorporated Child Support Order supported by a separate
or incorporated Child Support Worksheet (if any deviation in the child support
amount is requested, the Consent Decree, Judgment or Child Support Order
shall include a statement of the basis for deviation, as set forth in the Child
Support Guidelines);
3. copies of each parent’s Parent Information Program Certification of
Completion;
4. a completed Order of Assignment, including current employer
information sheet;
5. a completed Judgment Data Sheet, if required;
6. if the parties are requesting joint custody, a statement as to whether
domestic violence has occurred, and the extent of any such violence; and
7. for a paternity or maternity action, the identity of the natural mother and
father, and anyone who has lawful status as a parent or custodian of a child,
including the court case conferring such authority if not the instant case.
Rule 46. Dismissal
A. Voluntary. Any family law case or post-decree petition may be dismissed (1) by the
petitioner or the filing party without order of court by filing a notice of dismissal at any time
before service of a response, or (2) by order of the court pursuant to a stipulation of dismissal
signed by all parties who have appeared in the action. If a response has been filed to a petition or
post-decree petition, the petition may be dismissed by the petitioner or the filing party only by
motion and upon such terms and conditions as the court deems proper, including proper
adjudication of any pending counterclaims or counter petitions filed by an opposing party.
Unless otherwise stated in the notice or order of dismissal, the dismissal is without prejudice.
B. Involuntary Dismissal; Effect.
1. One hundred twenty (120) days after filing of a petition, if no Motion to Set has
been filed by either party, or if the court has not set the matter for trial, hearing, or
conference, the court may issue a notice that the matter will be dismissed by the court in
not less than sixty (60) days without further notice, unless prior to the expiration of the
sixty (60) days a proper Motion to Set or a request for hearing or conference is filed. No
case shall be dismissed, however, while there is pending before the court a motion for
summary judgment, motion for judgment on the pleadings, or a motion related to
genetic testing in a paternity matter. These periods may be extended by the court for
good cause shown.
2. For failure of the petitioner to prosecute or to comply with these rules or any
order of court, a respondent may move for dismissal of an action or of any claim against
the respondent.
493. The court may dismiss any action, post-decree petition, or any pending claim for
failure to prosecute the matter after giving all parties notice and an opportunity to object
or commence prosecution.
4. Unless otherwise stated in the notice or order of dismissal, the dismissal is
without prejudice.
C. Dismissal of Third Party Claim and Counterclaim. The provisions of this rule apply to
the dismissal of any third party claim or counterclaim. A voluntary dismissal by the claimant
alone pursuant to subdivision A(1) shall be made before a responsive pleading is served or, if
there is none, before the introduction of evidence at the trial or hearing.
D. Effect of Dismissal. Unless otherwise specifically ordered by the court, the entry of an
order dismissing a case serves to dismiss all pending, unadjudicated petitions and issues, but
does not dismiss, vacate, or set aside any final Decree, Judgment or Order previously entered in
the case.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
Paragraph B of this rule is an adaptation of that portion of existing Rule 38.1, Arizona Rules
of Civil Procedure, which deals with dismissals from the Inactive Calendar. The Committee
recognizes that the time periods set forth in subdivision B(1) are the same as those set forth in
Rule 40(I); however, the word “may” as used in subdivision B(1) allows different counties to
impose a time period in excess of four months after filing.
50VI. TEMPORARY ORDERS
Rule 47. Temporary Orders
A. Motions for Pre-Decree or Pre-Judgment Temporary Orders. A party seeking
temporary orders under A.R.S. §§ 25-315, 25-324, 25-404, 25-408, 25-817 or 25-905 shall do so
by filing a separate verified motion with the court setting forth the legal and jurisdictional basis
for the motion and the specific relief requested. The motion shall be filed after or concurrently
with the initial petition, shall incorporate the relevant allegations of a filed petition by reference
and not separately repeat them, and shall include the following information and documents,
where relevant:
1. Custody and Parenting Time. If a party seeks a temporary custody, parenting
time, or visitation order, the motion shall set forth a proposed parenting plan
specifically stating the custody, parenting time, and visitation requested for all parties to
the action.
2. Child Support. If a party seeks a temporary child support order, the party shall
include and file with the motion a completed a Child Support Worksheet setting forth
the amount requested in accordance with the current Arizona Child Support Guidelines.
The movant shall also provide copies of all child support disclosure documents required
by Rule 49(B) to the opposing party within the time period specified in paragraph E of
this rule, and shall provide an additional copy of these documents to the court at the
time of any evidentiary hearing held on the motion.
3. Spousal Maintenance. If a party seeks a temporary spousal maintenance order,
that party shall state the specific duration and amounts requested and file an Affidavit of
Financial Information on a form substantially in compliance with Rule 97, Form 2.
4. Property, Debt, and Attorneys’ Fees. If a party seeks temporary orders to
exclude a party from a residence, to divide community property, or to order payment of
debt, expenses, or attorneys’ fees, the motion shall set forth the specific relief requested,
the proposed division of property, the income and assets that will be available to each
party, and the responsibility each will have for payment of debt, expenses, and
attorneys’ fees if the order is granted. If a party seeks a temporary order for payment of
attorneys’ fees that party shall state the specific amount requested and file an Affidavit
of Financial Information on a form substantially in compliance with Rule 97, Form 2.
B. Motions for Post-Decree or Post-Judgment Temporary Custody Orders. A party
seeking a temporary custody, parenting time, or visitation order under A.R.S. §§ 25-404, 25-408,
or 25-1034, following a previous custody determination, shall do so by filing a separate verified
motion setting forth the legal and jurisdictional basis for the motion and the specific relief
requested. The motion shall be filed after or concurrently with a post-decree or post-judgment
petition authorized by statute, shall incorporate the relevant allegations of the pending post-
decree or post-judgment petition by reference and not separately repeat them, and shall set forth
the relief requested, including a proposed parenting plan stating the custody and parenting time
requested for all parties to the action.
51C. Order To Appear. Unless a different procedure is established by local rule, the moving
party shall submit to the assigned judicial officer the original and three (3) copies of an Order To
Appear in substantially the form set forth in Rule 97, Form 13, three (3) copies of the Motion,
and three (3) copies of the financial documents required by paragraph A of this rule. The clerk of
the court shall file the original Order to Appear when signed by the assigned judicial officer.
D. Hearing. Upon receiving a Motion for Temporary Orders and documents required by
paragraph C, the court shall issue an Order to Appear at a pretrial conference, a Resolution
Management Conference pursuant to Rule 76(A), or an evidentiary hearing, which shall be set
not later than thirty (30) days after receiving the motion. In the event the court holds a pretrial
conference or Resolution Management Conference at which all issues are not resolved, the court
shall then set an evidentiary hearing not later than thirty (30) days thereafter to resolve the
remaining issues, unless the parties agree to a different timeframe or procedure. The court shall
not resolve disputed issues of fact at a pretrial conference or Resolution Management Conference
absent agreement of the parties. The court for good cause shown may extend the timeframes set
forth in this paragraph.
E. Service. The moving party shall serve all parties with the required documents indicated
in paragraph C in accordance with the service requirements of these rules. Service shall be
completed at least ten (10) judicial days prior to the date of the scheduled conference or hearing
on the motion unless otherwise ordered by the court.
F. Response. Any party served with an Order To Appear on a Motion For Temporary
Orders shall not be required to file a formal response to the Motion For Temporary Orders but
shall fully comply with the requirements of paragraph G, and if the motion requests child
support, shall likewise file a completed Child Support Worksheet, copies of which shall be
provided to the assigned judicial officer, the opposing party’s attorney or, if unrepresented, to the
opposing party not later than three (3) days prior to the time set for hearing.
G. Requirements Prior To Conference or Hearing. If the court has set the motion for a
pretrial conference, Resolution Management Conference pursuant to Rule 76(A), or an
evidentiary hearing, the parties and counsel shall meet and confer, comply with the disclosure
requirements of Rule 49, and submit a written Resolution Statement as prescribed by Rule 97,
Form 4 or 5 as applicable, not less than five (5) days prior to the date set for the Resolution
Management Conference or evidentiary hearing. At least three (3) days prior to an evidentiary
hearing, the parties shall exchange any exhibits to be offered at the hearing, and a list of the
names, addresses and telephone numbers of all witnesses who may testify.
H. Attendance. All parties and, if represented, counsel, must be present at any pretrial
conference, Resolution Management Conference, or evidentiary hearing set by the court. If a
party fails to appear, the court may impose sanctions provided by Rule 76(D).
I. Simplified Child Support Order. Unless otherwise provided by local rule, a party
seeking a temporary child support order under A.R.S. §§ 25-315 or 25-817 may request a
simplified order by filing with the court a verified Motion for Simplified Temporary Child
Support Order, a completed Child Support Worksheet, a proposed Simplified Temporary Child
Support Order, and a proposed Order of Assignment. The motion shall provide that the
responding party is required to timely file a response, a completed Child Support Worksheet, and
52if a hearing is requested, a notice of hearing, and that failure to do so may result in a Temporary
Child Support Order being entered as requested by the moving party. Upon service of process,
the other party shall have twenty (20) days, if served in Arizona, or thirty (30) days if served out
of the State of Arizona, to file a response. If no response is filed, or if the response does not
specifically contest the child support requested in the motion, the proposed Simplified
Temporary Child Support Order and Order of Assignment shall be entered, without hearing,
provided that the available information in support of the temporary order appears accurate and
provides the court with adequate information to determine the amount of child support pursuant
to the Arizona Child Support Guidelines. The entry of a Simplified Temporary Child Support
Order does not prejudice the rights of the parties to have the issue finally determined at a
subsequent hearing or trial.
J. Summary Temporary Child Support Order. If upon review of the pleadings and the
supporting documents submitted pursuant to paragraph I, or, if at the time of the Resolution
Management Conference, the court determines that the party entitled to receive child support is
seeking an amount that is less than or equal to 150% of the amount of child support the obligor is
willing to pay, the court may enter a Summary Temporary Child Support Order within the range
of the parties’ positions without an evidentiary hearing. The entry of a Summary Temporary
Child Support Order does not prejudice the rights of the parties to have the issue finally
determined at a subsequent hearing or trial. The parties’ positions under this paragraph must be
based on an application of the Arizona Child Support Guidelines.
K. Request for Expedited Hearing. Any request for an expedited hearing shall include in
the caption “Expedited Hearing Required,” and the motion shall set forth the specific facts
necessitating an expedited hearing. A request for an expedited hearing may be considered by the
court without response or oral argument.
L. Local Procedures. Nothing contained in this rule shall preclude any county from
implementing an alternative temporary child support process by local rule or administrative
order.
M. Enforceability of Temporary Orders. Temporary orders signed by the court and filed
by the clerk are enforceable as final orders during the pendency of the action. Temporary orders
become ineffective and unenforceable upon termination of an action either by dismissal or
following entry of a final decree, judgment, or order, unless that final decree, judgment, or order
provides otherwise. Orders of Protection and Injunctions Against Harassment are not subject to
the provisions of this rule.
N. Sanctions. Failure to comply with this rule may result in sanctions pursuant to Rule 71.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
The pretrial conference referred to in this rule is intended to be a brief hearing at which the
goals set forth in Rule 76(A)(3)(c) through (f) are considered.
Rule 48. Temporary Orders without Notice
53A. Affidavit. A party seeking a temporary order without notice shall do so by filing a
separate, verified motion or affidavit, together with a proposed form of order, and a notice of
hearing on the motion. A temporary order may be granted without written or oral notice to the
other party or that party’s attorney only if:
1. it clearly appears from specific facts shown by affidavit or by the verified motion
that irreparable injury will result to the moving party or a minor child of the party, or
that irreparable injury, loss, or damage will result to the separate or community property
of the party if no order is issued before the other party can be heard in opposition; and
2. the moving party or the party’s attorney certifies to the court, in writing, the
efforts, if any, that have been made to give the notice to the other party or the reasons
supporting the claim that notice should not be required.
B. Order. A temporary order granted without notice shall define the injury, loss, or damage
and state why it is irreparable, and shall state why the order was granted without notice. Such
order shall expire by its terms at the date and time set for hearing on the motion for temporary
orders without notice unless extended by the court for good cause shown. A hearing shall be set
on the motion for temporary orders without notice within ten (10) days from the entry of the
order, unless extended by the court for good cause shown. The order and notice of hearing shall
be served upon the other party as soon as possible after issuance of the order or as otherwise
ordered by the court. Nothing herein shall prevent the party against whom a temporary order
without notice has been issued from requesting an earlier hearing upon reasonable notice as
directed by the court.
C. Bond. No bond shall be required unless the court deems it appropriate.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 65(d), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
54VII. DISCLOSURE AND DISCOVERY
Rule 49. Disclosure
The requirements of this rule are minimum disclosure requirements for every family law
case. Unless otherwise provided for in this rule or agreed to by the parties, within forty (40) days
after the filing of a response to an initial petition, each party shall disclose in writing to every
other party the information set forth in this rule.
A. Resolution Statement. Each party shall disclose a written Resolution Statement in a
form that substantially complies with Rule 97, Form 4 or 5, as applicable, setting forth any
agreements and a specific, detailed position the party proposes to resolve all issues in the case,
without argument in support of the position.
B. Child Support. In a case in which child support is an issue, each party shall disclose the
following information:
1. a fully completed Affidavit of Financial Information on a form substantially in
compliance with Rule 97, Form 2;
2. proof of income of the party from all sources, specifically including complete tax
returns, W-2 forms, 1099 forms, and K-1 forms, for the past two (2) completed calendar
years, and year-to-date income information for the current calendar year, including, but not
limited to, year-to-date pay stub, salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, dividends,
severance pay, pensions, interest, trust income, annuities, capital gains, social security
benefits, worker’s compensation benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, disability
insurance benefits, recurring gifts, prizes, and spousal maintenance;
3. proof of court-ordered child support and spousal maintenance actually paid by the
party in any case other than the one in which disclosure is being provided;
4. proof of all medical, dental, and vision insurance premiums paid by the party for
any child listed or referenced in the petition;
5. proof of any child care expenses paid by the party for any child listed or referenced
in the petition;
6. proof of any expenses paid by the party for private or special schools or other
particular education needs of a child listed or referenced in the petition; and
7. proof of any expenses paid by the party for the special needs of a gifted or
handicapped child listed or referenced in the petition.
C. Spousal Maintenance and Attorneys’ Fees and Costs. If either party has requested an
award of spousal maintenance or an award of attorneys’ fees and costs, each party shall disclose the
following information:
1. a fully completed Affidavit of Financial Information on a form substantially in
compliance with Rule 97, Form 2; and
552. those documents set forth in subdivision B(2) above.
D. Property. Unless the parties have entered into a written agreement disposing of all property
issues in the case, or no property is at issue in the case, each party shall provide to the other the
following information in every action for dissolution of marriage or for legal separation:
1. copies of all deeds, deeds of trust, purchase agreements, escrow documents,
settlement sheets, and all other documents that disclose the ownership, legal description,
purchase price and encumbrances of all real property owned by any party;
2.copies of all monthly or periodic bank, checking, savings, brokerage and security
account statements in which any party has or had an interest for the period commencing
six (6) months prior to the filing of the petition and through the date of the disclosure;
3. copies of all monthly or periodic statements and documents showing the value of
all pension, retirement, stock option, and annuity balances, including Individual
Retirement Accounts, 401(k) accounts, and all other retirement and employee benefits
and accounts in which any party has or had an interest for the period commencing six
(6) months prior to the filing of the petition and through the date of the disclosure, or if
no monthly or quarterly statements are available during this time period, the most recent
statements or documents that disclose the information;
4. copies of all monthly or periodic statements and documents showing the cash
surrender value, face value, and premiums charged for all life insurance policies in
which any party has an interest for the period commencing six (6) months prior to the
filing of the petition and through the date of the disclosure, or if no monthly or quarterly
statements are available for this time period, the most recent statements or documents
that disclose the information;
5. copies of all documents that may assist in identifying or valuing any item of real or
personal property in which any party has or had an interest for the period commencing six
(6) months prior to the filing of the petition, including any documents that the party may
rely upon in placing a value on any item of real or personal property;
6. copies of all business tax returns, balance sheets, profit and loss statements, and all
documents that may assist in identifying or valuing any business or business interest for
the last two (2) completed calendar or fiscal years with respect to any business or entity in
which any party has or had an interest; and
7. a list of all items of personal property, including, but not limited to, household
furniture, furnishings, antiques, artwork, vehicles, jewelry and similar items in which any
party has an interest, together with the party’s estimate of current fair market value (not
replacement value) for each item.
E. Debts. Unless the parties have entered into a written agreement disposing of all debt issues
in the case, each party shall provide to the other the following information in every action for
dissolution of marriage or for legal separation:
561. copies of all monthly or periodic statements and documents showing the
balances owing on all mortgages, notes, liens, and encumbrances outstanding against all
real property and personal property in which the party has or had an interest for the
period commencing six (6) months prior to the filing of the petition and through the
date of the disclosure, or if no monthly or quarterly statements are available during this
time period, the most recent statements or documents that disclose the information; and
2. copies of credit card statements and debt statements for all months for the period
commencing six (6) months prior to the filing of the petition and through the date of the
disclosure.
F. Disclosure of Witnesses. Each party shall disclose names, addresses, and telephone
numbers of any witness whom the disclosing party expects to call at trial, along with a statement
fairly describing the substance of each witness’s expected testimony. A party shall not be
allowed to call a witness who has not been disclosed at least sixty (60) days before trial, or such
different period as may be ordered by the court.
G. Disclosure of Expert Witnesses. Each party shall disclose the name and address of each
person whom the disclosing party expects to call as an expert witness at trial, the subject matter
on which the expert is expected to testify, the substance of the facts and opinions to which the
expert is expected to testify, a summary of the grounds for each opinion, the qualifications of the
witness, and the name and address of the custodian of copies of any reports prepared by the
expert. A party shall not be allowed to call an expert witness who has not been disclosed at least
sixty (60) days before trial or such different period as may be ordered by the court.
H. Continuing Duty to Disclose. The duty described in this rule shall be a continuing duty,
and each party shall make additional or amended disclosures whenever new or different
information is discovered or revealed. Such additional or amended disclosures shall be made not
more than thirty (30) days after the information is revealed to or discovered by the disclosing
party.
I. Additional Discovery. Nothing in the minimum requirements of this rule shall preclude
relevant additional discovery on request by a party in a family law case, in which case further
discovery may proceed as set forth in Rule 51.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 26.1, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 50. Complex Case Disclosure
Not later than twenty (20) days after filing of a responsive pleading, if a party believes more
detailed disclosure is necessary than that set forth in Rule 49, that party shall file a notice with
the court that disclosure pursuant to Rule 26.1, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, shall be
required. If this rule is timely invoked, disclosure shall be made within forty (40) days after the
filing of the notice.
57Rule 51. Discovery
A. Methods. Parties may obtain discovery by one or more of the following methods:
depositions upon oral examination or written questions; written interrogatories; production of
documents or things or permission to enter upon land or other property for inspection and other
purposes; physical and mental examinations; and requests for admission.
B. Discovery Scope and Limits. Unless otherwise limited by order of the court in
accordance with these rules, the scope of discovery is as follows.
1. In General. Parties may obtain discovery regarding any matter, not privileged,
that is relevant to the subject matter involved in the pending action, whether it relates to
the claim or defense of the party seeking discovery, including the existence, description,
nature, custody, condition, and location of any books, documents, or other tangible
things and the identity and location of persons having knowledge of any discoverable
matter. It is not ground for objection that the information sought will be inadmissible at
the trial if the information sought appears reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery
of admissible evidence. The frequency or extent of use of the discovery methods set
forth in paragraph A may be limited by the court if it determines that:
a. the discovery sought is unreasonably cumulative or duplicative, or
obtainable from some other source that is more convenient, less burdensome,
or less expensive;
b. the party seeking discovery has had ample opportunity by discovery in
the action to obtain the information sought; or
c. the discovery is unduly burdensome or expensive, given the needs of the
case, the amount in controversy, limitations on the parties' resources, and the
importance of the issues at stake in the litigation. The court may act upon its
own initiative after reasonable notice or pursuant to a motion under Rule 53.
2. Trial Preparation: Materials. Subject to the provisions of subdivision B(3), a
party may obtain discovery of documents and tangible things otherwise discoverable
under subdivision B(1) and prepared in anticipation of litigation or for trial by or for
another party or by or for that other party's representative (including the other party's
attorney or consultant) only upon a showing that the party seeking discovery has
substantial need of the materials in the preparation of the party's case and that the party
is unable without undue hardship to obtain the substantial equivalent of the materials by
other means. In ordering discovery of such materials when the required showing has
been made, the court shall protect against disclosure of the mental impressions,
conclusions, opinions, or legal theories of an attorney or other representative of a party
concerning the litigation.
A party may obtain, without the required showing, a statement concerning the
action or its subject matter previously made by that party. If the request is refused, the
person may move for a court order. The provisions of Rule 65(A)(4) apply to the award
of expenses incurred in relation to the motion. For purposes of this paragraph, a
58statement previously made is (a) a written statement signed or otherwise adopted or
approved by the person making it, or (b) a stenographic, mechanical, electrical, or other
recording, or a transcription thereof, which is a substantially verbatim recital of an oral
statement by the person making it and is contemporaneously recorded.
3. Trial Preparation: Experts.
a. A party may depose any person who has been identified as an expert
whose opinions may be presented at trial.
b. A party may, through interrogatories or by deposition, discover facts
known or opinions held by an expert who has been retained or specially
employed by another party in anticipation of litigation or preparation for trial
and who is not expected to be called as a witness at trial, only as provided in
Rule 63(B) or upon a showing of exceptional circumstances under which it is
impracticable for the party seeking discovery to obtain facts or opinions on the
same subject by other means.
c. Unless manifest injustice would result, (1) the court shall require that
the party seeking discovery pay the expert a reasonable fee for time spent in
responding to discovery under subdivisions B(3)(a) and B(3)(b); and (2) with
respect to discovery obtained under subdivision B(3)(b), the court shall require
the party seeking discovery to pay the other party a fair portion of the fees and
expenses reasonably incurred by the latter party in obtaining facts and opinions
from the expert.
C. Sequence and Timing of Discovery. Unless the court upon motion orders otherwise,
methods of discovery may be used in any sequence and the fact that a party is conducting
discovery, whether by deposition or otherwise, shall not operate to delay any other party's
discovery.
D. Supplementation of Responses
1. A party is under a duty to supplement any response to a request for discovery,
and in any event not later than thirty (30) days prior to trial, except for good cause
shown, if:
a. the party knows the response was incorrect when made; or
b. the party knows the response, though correct when made, is no longer
true; and
c. the circumstances are such that a failure to amend the response is in
substance a knowing concealment.
2. Any witness or evidence not timely disclosed shall not be permitted at trial
except for good cause shown or upon written agreement of the parties.
593. A duty to supplement responses may also be imposed by order of the court,
agreement of the parties, or at any time prior to trial through new requests for
supplementation of prior responses.
E. Discovery Requests, Responses, Objections, and Sanctions. The court shall assess an
appropriate sanction, including any order under Rule 76(D), against any party or attorney who
has engaged in unreasonable, groundless, abusive, or obstructionist conduct.
F. Discovery Motions. No discovery motion will be considered or scheduled unless a
separate statement of moving counsel is attached thereto certifying that, after personal
consultation and good faith efforts to do so, counsel have been unable to satisfactorily resolve the
matter.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 26, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 52. Subpoena
A. Form; Issuance.
1. Every subpoena shall:
a. state the name of the Arizona court from which it is issued; and
b. state the title of the action, the name of the court in which it is pending,
and its civil action number; and
c. command each person to whom it is directed to attend and give
testimony or to produce and permit inspection and copying of designated
books, documents or tangible things in the possession, custody or control of
that person, or to permit inspection of premises, at a time and place therein
specified; and
d. set forth the recipients' rights and obligations under the subpoenas as
follows:
Your Duties In Responding To This Subpoena:
You have the duty to produce the documents requested as they are
kept by you in the usual course of business, or you may organize the
documents and label them to correspond with the categories set forth in
this subpoena. See Rule 52(D)(1) of the Arizona Rules of Family Law
Procedure.
If this subpoena asks you to produce and permit inspection and
copying of designated books, papers, documents, tangible things, or the
inspection of premises, you need not appear to produce the items unless
60the subpoena states that you must appear for a deposition, hearing, or trial.
See Rule 52(C)(2)(a) of the Arizona Rules of Family Law Procedure.
Your Right To Object:
The party or attorney serving the subpoena has a duty to take
reasonable steps to avoid imposing an undue burden or expense on you.
The Superior Court enforces this duty and may impose sanctions upon the
party or attorney serving the subpoena if this duty is breached. See Rule
52(C)(1) of the Arizona Rules of Family Law Procedure.
You may object to this subpoena if you feel that you should not be
required to respond to the request(s) made. Any objection to this subpoena
must be made within 14 days after it is served upon you, or before the time
specified for compliance, by providing a written objection to the party or
attorney serving the subpoena. See Rule 52(C)(2)(b) of the Arizona Rules
of Family Law Procedure.
If you object because you claim the information requested is
privileged or subject to protection as trial preparation material, you must
express the objection clearly and support each objection with a description
of the nature of the document, communication or item not produced so
that the demanding party can contest the claim. See Rule 52(D)(2) of the
Arizona Rules of Family Law Procedure.
If you object to the subpoena in writing, you do not need to comply
with the subpoena until a court orders you to do so. It will be up to the
party or attorney serving the subpoena to seek an order from the court to
compel you to provide the documents or inspection requested, after
providing notice to you. See Rule 52(C)(2)(b) of the Arizona Rules of
Family Law Procedure.
If you are not a party to the litigation, or an officer of a party, the
court will issue an order to protect you from any significant expense
resulting from the inspection and copying commanded. See Rule
52(C)(2)(b) of the Arizona Rules of Family Law Procedure.
You also may file a motion in the superior court of the county in
which the case is pending to quash or modify the subpoena if the
subpoena:
(1) does not provide a reasonable time for compliance;
(2) requires a non-party or officer of a party to travel to a county
different from the county where the person resides or does business in
person; or to travel to a county different from where the subpoena was
served; or to travel to a place farther than 40 miles from the place of
service; or to travel to a place different from any other convenient
place fixed by an order of a court, except that a subpoena for you to
61appear and testify at trial can command you to travel from any place
within the state;
(3) requires the disclosure of privileged or protected information
and no waiver or exception applies; or
(4) subjects you to an undue burden. See Rule 52(C)(3)(d) of the
Arizona Rules of Family Law Procedure.
If this subpoena:
(1) requires disclosure of a trade secret or other confidential
research, development, or commercial trade information; or
(2) requires disclosure of an unretained expert's opinion or
information not describing specific events or occurrences in dispute
and resulting from the expert's study made not at the request of any
party; or
(3) requires a person who is not a party or an officer of a party to
incur substantial travel expense,
the court may either quash or modify the subpoena, or the court may order
you to appear or produce documents only upon specified conditions, if the
party who served the subpoena shows a substantial need for the testimony
or material that cannot be otherwise met without undue hardship and
assures that you will be reasonably compensated. See Rule 52(C)(3)(d)(3)
of the Arizona Rules of Family Law Procedure.
A command to produce evidence or to permit inspection may be
joined with a command to appear at trial or hearing or at deposition, or
may be issued separately.
2. A subpoena commanding attendance at a trial or hearing shall issue from the
superior court for the county in which the hearing or trial is to be held. A subpoena for
attendance at a deposition shall issue from the superior court for the county in which the
case is pending. If separate from a subpoena commanding the attendance of a person, a
subpoena for production or inspection shall issue from the superior court for the county
in which the production or inspection is to be made.
3. The clerk shall issue a subpoena signed, but otherwise blank, to a party
requesting it, who shall complete it before service.
B. Service.
1. A subpoena may be served by any person who is not a party and is not less than
eighteen years of age. Service of a subpoena upon a person named therein shall be made
by delivering a copy thereof to such person and, if the person's attendance is
commanded, by tendering to that person the fees for one day's attendance and the
62mileage allowed by law. When the subpoena is issued on behalf of the state or an
officer or agency thereof, fees and mileage need not be tendered. Prior notice of any
commanded production of documents and things or inspection of premises before trial
shall be served on each party in the manner prescribed by Rule 43(C).
2. A subpoena may be served anywhere within the state.
3. Proof of service when necessary shall be made by filing with the clerk of the
court of the county in which the case is pending a statement of the date and manner of
service and of the names of the persons served, certified by the person who made
service.
C. Protection of Persons Subject to Subpoenas.
1. Sanctions. A party or an attorney responsible for the service of a subpoena shall
take reasonable steps to avoid imposing undue burden or expense on a person subject to
that subpoena. The superior court of the county where the subpoena was issued shall
enforce this duty and impose upon the party or attorney in breach of this duty an
appropriate sanction, which may include, but is not limited to, lost earnings and a
reasonable attorney’s fee.
2. Personal Appearance; Objections.
a. A person commanded to produce and permit inspection and copying of
designated books, papers, documents, or tangible things, or inspection of
premises need not appear in person at the place of production or inspection
unless commanded to appear for deposition, hearing, or trial.
b. Subject to subdivision D(2), the recipient may, within fourteen (14)
days after the service of the subpoena or before the time specified for
compliance if such time is less than fourteen (14) days after service, serve
upon the party or attorney designated in the subpoena written objection to
inspection or copying of any or all of the designated materials or inspection of
the premises. If objection is made, the party serving the subpoena shall not be
entitled to inspect and copy the materials or inspect the premises except
pursuant to an order of the court from which the subpoena was issued. If
objection has been made, the party serving the subpoena, upon notice to the
recipient, may move at any time for an order to compel the production or
inspection. Such an order to compel production or inspection shall protect any
person who is not a party or an officer of a party from significant expense
resulting from the inspection and copying commanded.
3. Quashing or Modifying Subpoena. On timely motion, the superior court of the
county in which the case is pending or from which a subpoena was issued may quash or
modify the subpoena if it:
a. fails to allow reasonable time for compliance;
63b. requires a person who is not a party or an officer of a party to travel to a
place other than the county in which the person resides or transacts business in
person or is served with a subpoena, or within forty (40) miles from the place
of service, or such other convenient place fixed by an order of court, except
that, subject to the provisions of subdivision C(3)(g), such a person may in
order to attend trial be commanded to travel from any such place within the
state or appear by electronic means, as approved by the court;
c. requires disclosure of privileged or other protected matter and no
exception or waiver applies;
d. subjects a person to undue burden;
e. requires disclosure of a trade secret or other confidential research,
development, or commercial information;
f. requires disclosure of an unretained expert's opinion or information not
describing specific events or occurrences in dispute and resulting from the
expert's study made not at the request of any party; or
g. requires a person who is not a party or an officer of a party to incur
substantial travel expense.
D. Duties in Responding to Subpoena.
1. A person responding to a subpoena to produce documents shall produce them as
they are kept in the usual course of business or shall organize and label them to
correspond with the categories in the demand.
2. When information subject to a subpoena is withheld on a claim that it is
privileged or subject to protection as trial preparation materials, the claim shall be made
in writing and shall be supported by a description of the nature of the documents,
communications, or things not produced, sufficient to enable the demanding party to
contest the claim.
E. Contempt. Failure of any person, without adequate cause, to obey a subpoena properly
served may be deemed a contempt of the superior court of the county from which the subpoena
issued. Adequate cause for failure to obey exists when a subpoena purports to require a non-party
to attend or produce at a place not within the limits provided by subdivision A(1)(d)(2).
F. Failure to Produce Documentary Evidence. Upon failure to produce documentary
evidence as provided in this rule, secondary evidence of the books, papers, documents or
tangible things may be offered at trial.
G. ADA Notification. The subpoena shall state that "Requests for reasonable
accommodation for persons with disabilities must be made to the court by parties at least three
(3) working days in advance of a scheduled court proceeding."
64H. Service on Other Parties. Unless otherwise stipulated or ordered by the court,
documents obtained by subpoena shall be copied or made available to the other parties, whether
or not intended to be used at trial, not later than fourteen (14) days after receipt of the documents.
In the event the trial or hearing is set in fewer than fourteen (14) days after receipt of the
documents, disclosure shall be made not later than three (3) days prior to the trial or hearing.
The cost to copy the subpoenaed documents for another party initially shall be paid by such other
party, subject to further order of the court.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 45, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 53. Protective Orders Regarding Discovery Requests
A. Protection of Persons Subject to Discovery Request. Subject to paragraph B of this
rule, upon motion by a party or by the person from whom discovery or disclosure is sought, and
for good cause shown, the court in which the action is pending or alternatively, on matters
relating to a deposition, the court in the county where the deposition is to be taken, may make
any order which justice requires to protect a party or person from annoyance, embarrassment,
oppression, or undue burden or expense, including one or more of the following:
1. that the discovery or disclosure not be had;
2. that the discovery or disclosure may be had only on specified terms and
conditions, including a designation of the time or place;
3. that the discovery or disclosure may be had only by a method of discovery or
disclosure other than that selected by the party seeking discovery or disclosure;
4. that certain matters not be inquired into, or that the scope of the discovery or
disclosure be limited to certain matters;
5. that discovery or disclosure be conducted with no one present except persons
designated by the court;
6. that a deposition, after being sealed, be opened only by order of the court;
7. that the parties simultaneously file specified documents or information enclosed
in sealed envelopes to be opened as directed by the court. If the motion for a protective
order is denied in whole or in part, the court may, on such terms and conditions as are
just, order that any party or person provide or permit discovery or disclosure. The
provisions of Rule 65(A)(4) apply to the award of expenses incurred in relation to the
motion.
B. Confidentiality Order. Before entering an order in any way restricting a party or person
from disclosing information or materials produced in discovery or disclosure to a person who is
not a party to the litigation in which the information or materials are being discovered or
disclosed, or denying an intervener's request for access to such discovery or disclosure materials,
a court shall direct: (1) the party seeking confidentiality to show why a confidentiality order
65should be entered or continued; and (2) the party or intervener opposing confidentiality to show
why a confidentiality order should be denied in whole or part, modified or vacated. The burden
of showing good cause for an order shall remain with the movant. The court shall then make
findings of fact concerning any relevant factors, including but not limited to: (1) any party's need
to maintain the confidentiality of such information or materials; (2) any intervener's need to
obtain access to such information or materials; and (3) any possible risk to the safety or financial
welfare to which such information or materials may relate or reveal. Any order restricting release
of such information or materials to nonparties or interveners shall use the least restrictive means
to maintain any needed confidentiality. No such findings of fact are needed where the parties
have stipulated to such an order or where a motion to intervene and to obtain access to materials
subject to a confidentiality order are not opposed.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 26(c), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 54. Depositions before Action or Pending Appeal
A. Before Action; Petition; Notice and Service; Order and Examination; Use of
Deposition
1. A person who desires to perpetuate that person's own testimony or that of
another person regarding any matter that may be cognizable in any court may file a
verified petition in the superior court in the county of the residence of any expected
adverse party. The petition shall be entitled in the name of the petitioner and shall show:
a. that the petitioner expects to be a party to an action cognizable in a court
but is presently unable to bring it or cause it to be brought;
b. the subject matter of the expected action and the petitioner's interest
therein;
c. the facts that the petitioner desires to establish by the proposed
testimony and the reasons for desiring to perpetuate it;
d. the names or a description of the persons the petitioner expects will be
adverse parties and their addresses so far as known; and
e. the names and addresses of the persons to be examined and the
substance of the testimony which the petitioner expects to elicit from each. The
petition shall also ask for an order authorizing the petitioner to take the
depositions of the persons to be examined named in the petition, for the
purpose of perpetuating their testimony.
2. The petitioner shall thereafter serve a notice upon each person named in the
petition as an expected adverse party, together with a copy of the petition, stating that
the petitioner will apply to the court, at a time and place named therein, for the order
described in the petition. At least twenty (20) days before the date of hearing the notice
66shall be served either within or without the state in the manner provided in Rule 41 or
Rule 42 for service of summons, but if such service cannot with due diligence be made
upon any expected adverse party named in the petition, the court may make such order
as is just for service by publication or otherwise, and shall appoint, for persons not
served in the manner provided in Rule 41 or Rule 42, an attorney who shall represent
them, and, in case they are not otherwise represented, shall cross-examine the deponent.
If any expected adverse party is a minor or incompetent, the provisions of Rule 10(H)
shall apply.
3. If the court is satisfied that the perpetuation of the testimony may prevent a
failure or delay of justice, it shall make an order designating or describing the persons
whose depositions may be taken and specifying the subject matter of the examination
and whether the depositions shall be taken upon oral examination or written
interrogatories. The depositions may then be taken in accordance with these rules, and
the court may make orders of the character provided for by Rules 62 and 63. For the
purpose of applying these rules to depositions for perpetuating testimony, each
reference therein to the court in which the action is pending shall be deemed to refer to
the court in which the petition for such deposition was filed.
4. If a deposition to perpetuate testimony is taken under these rules, it may be used
in any action involving the same subject matter subsequently brought, in accordance
with the provisions of Rule 59(A).
B. Pending Appeal. If an appeal has been taken from a judgment of a superior court or
before taking an appeal if the time therefore has not expired, the court in which the judgment was
rendered may allow the taking of the depositions of witnesses to perpetuate their testimony for
use in the event of further proceedings in the court. In such case the party who desires to
perpetuate the testimony may make a motion in the court for leave to take the depositions, upon
the same notice and service thereof as if the action was pending in the court. The motion shall
show the names and addresses of the persons to be examined, the substance of the testimony
which the party expects to elicit from each and the reasons for perpetuating their testimony. If
the court finds that the perpetuation of the testimony is proper to avoid a failure or delay of
justice, it may make an order allowing the depositions to be taken and may make orders of the
character provided for by Rules 62 and 63, and thereupon the depositions may be taken and used
in the same manner and under the same conditions as are prescribed in these rules for depositions
taken in actions pending in the superior court.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based upon Rule 27, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 55. Persons before Whom Depositions May Be Taken
A. Within the United States; Commission or Letters Rogatory. Within the United States
or within a territory or insular possession subject to the jurisdiction of the United States,
depositions shall be taken before an officer authorized to administer oaths by the laws of the
United States, the State of Arizona, or of the place where the examination is held, or before a
person appointed by the court in which the action is pending. A person so appointed has power to
67administer oaths and take testimony. Depositions may be taken in this state or anywhere upon
notice provided by these rules without a commission, letters rogatory or other writ. The term
“officer,” as used in Rules 57, 58 and 59, includes a person appointed by the court or designated
by the parties under Rule 56.
Upon proof that the notice to take a deposition outside this state has been given as provided
by these rules, the party seeking such deposition may, but is not required, after one full day's
notice to the other parties, have issued by the clerk, in the form given in such notice, a
commission or letters rogatory or other like writ either in lieu of the notice to take the deposition
or supplementary thereto. Failure to file written objections to such form before or at the time of
its issuance shall be a waiver of any objection thereto. Any objection shall be heard and
determined forthwith by the court or judge thereof.
B. In Foreign Countries. In a foreign country, depositions may be taken (1) on notice
before a person authorized to administer oaths in the place in which the examination is held,
either by the law thereof or by the law of the United States, or (2) before a person commissioned
by the court, and a person so commissioned shall have the power by virtue of the commission to
administer any necessary oath and take testimony, or (3) pursuant to a letter rogatory. A
commission or a letter rogatory shall be issued on application and notice and on terms that are
just and appropriate. It is not requisite to the issuance of a commission or a letter rogatory that
the taking of the deposition in any other manner is impracticable or inconvenient; and both a
commission and a letter rogatory may be issued in proper cases. A notice or commission may
designate the person before whom the deposition is to be taken either by the name or descriptive
title. A letter rogatory may be addressed “To the Appropriate Authority in (here name the
country).” Evidence obtained in response to a letter rogatory need not be excluded merely for the
reason that it is not a verbatim transcript or that the testimony was not taken under oath or for
any similar departure from the requirements for depositions taken within the United States under
these rules.
C. Disqualification for Interest. No deposition shall be taken before a person who is a
relative or employee or attorney or counsel of any of the parties, or is a relative or employee of
such attorney or counsel, or is financially interested in the action.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based upon Rule 28, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 56. Stipulations Regarding Discovery Procedure
Unless the court orders otherwise, the parties may by stipulation (1) provide that depositions
may be taken before any person, at any time or place, upon any notice, and in any manner and
when so taken may be used like other depositions, and (2) modify the procedures provided by
these rules for other methods of discovery, including extending the time provided in Rules 60,
61, 62, and 64 for responses to discovery.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based upon Rule 29, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
68Rule 57. Depositions upon Oral Examination
A. When Depositions May Be Taken. After commencement of the action, the testimony of
parties or their current spouses, or any expert witnesses expected to be called, may be taken by
deposition upon oral examination. Depositions of document custodians may be taken to secure
production of documents and to establish evidentiary foundation. No other depositions shall be
taken except upon: (1) agreement of all parties; (2) an order of the court following a motion
demonstrating good cause; or (3) an order of the court following a Resolution Management
Conference pursuant to Rule 76(A).
If the petitioner or other party seeks to take a deposition prior to the expiration of thirty (30)
days after service of the summons and petition upon any respondent or other party or service that
is completed under Rule 42, leave of court, granted with or without notice, is required, except
that leave is not required: (1) if a respondent or other party has served a notice of taking
deposition or otherwise sought discovery, or (2) if special notice is given as provided in
subdivision B(2). The attendance of witnesses may be compelled by subpoena as provided in
Rule 52. The deposition of a person in confinement may be taken only by leave of court on such
terms as the court prescribes.
B. Notice of Examination; General Requirements; Special Notice; Non-Stenographic
Recording; Production of Documents and Things; Deposition of Organization; Deposition
by Telephone.
1. Absent a stipulation of all parties to the action or an order of the court
authorizing a briefer notice, a party desiring to take the deposition of any person upon
oral examination shall give notice in writing to every other party to the action at least
ten (10) days prior to the date of the deposition. The notice shall state the time and place
for taking the deposition and the name and address of each person to be examined, if
known, and, if the name is not known, a general description sufficient to identify the
person or the particular class or group to which the person belongs. If a subpoena duces
tecum is to be served on the person to be examined, the designation of the materials to
be produced as set forth in the subpoena shall be attached to or included in the notice.
2. Leave of court is not required for the taking of a deposition by petitioner or other
party initiating an action if the notice (a) states that the person to be examined is about
to go out of the State of Arizona and will be unavailable for examination unless the
person's deposition is taken before expiration of the 30-day period, and (b) sets forth
facts to support the statement. The petitioner’s or other initiating party’s attorney shall
sign the notice, and the attorney's signature constitutes a certification by the attorney
that to the best of the attorney's knowledge, information, and belief the statement and
supporting facts are true. The sanctions provided by Rule 31(A) are applicable to the
certification. If a party shows that when the party was served with notice under
subdivision B(2) the party was unable through the exercise of diligence to obtain
counsel to represent the party at the taking of the deposition, the deposition may not be
used against the party.
3. The court may for cause shown enlarge or shorten the time for taking the
deposition.
694. The parties may stipulate in writing or the court may upon motion order that the
testimony at a deposition be recorded by other than stenographic means. The stipulation
or order shall designate the person before whom the deposition shall be taken, the
manner of recording, preserving and filing the deposition, and may include other
provisions to assure that the recorded testimony will be accurate and trustworthy. A
party may arrange to have a stenographic transcription made at the party's own expense.
Any changes made by the witness, the witness' signature identifying the deposition as
the witness' own, or the statement of the officer that is required if the witness does not
sign as provided in paragraph E, and the certification of the officer required by
paragraph F shall be set forth in a writing to accompany a deposition recorded by non-
stenographic means.
5. The notice to a party deponent may be accompanied by a request made in
compliance with Rule 62 for the production of documents and tangible things at the
taking of the deposition. The procedure of Rule 62 shall apply to the request.
6. A party may, in the party's notice, name as the deponent a public or private
corporation, a partnership, an association, or a governmental agency and designate with
reasonable particularity the matters on which examination is requested. The
organization so named shall designate one or more officers, directors, or managing
agents, or other persons who consent to testify on its behalf and may set forth, for each
person designated, the matters on which that person will testify. The persons so
designated shall testify as to matters known or reasonably available to the organization.
This subdivision B(6) does not preclude taking a deposition by any other procedure
authorized in these rules.
7. The parties may stipulate or the court may order that a deposition be taken by
telephone. For the purpose of this rule and Rules 55(A), 65(A)(1), 52(C)(3), and 52(E),
a deposition is taken in the county where the deponent is to answer questions
propounded to the deponent.
C. Examination and Cross-Examination; Record of Examination; Oath; Objections.
Examination and cross-examination of witnesses may proceed as permitted at the trial under the
provisions of Rule 2(B). The examination shall commence at the time and place specified in the
notice or within thirty (30) minutes thereafter and, unless otherwise stipulated or ordered, will be
continued on successive days, except Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, until completed.
Any party not present within thirty (30) minutes following the time specified in the notice of
taking deposition waives any objection that the deposition was taken without that party's
presence. The officer before whom the deposition is to be taken shall put the witness on oath and
shall personally, or by someone acting under the officer's direction and in the officer's presence,
record the testimony of the witness. If the deposition is taken telephonically and the witness is
not physically in the presence of the officer before whom the deposition is to be taken, the officer
may nonetheless place the witness under oath with the same force and effect as if the witness
were physically present before the officer. The testimony shall be taken stenographically or
recorded by any other means ordered in accordance with subdivision B(4). If requested by one of
the parties, the testimony shall be transcribed. If the testimony is transcribed, the party noticing
the deposition or the party causing the deposition to be taken shall be responsible for the cost of
the original transcript.
70All objections made at the time of the examination to the qualifications of the officer taking
the deposition, or to the manner of taking it, or to the evidence presented, or to the conduct of
any party, and any other objection to the proceedings, shall be noted by the officer upon the
deposition. Evidence objected to shall be taken subject to the objections. The court shall assess
an appropriate sanction, including a sanction provided for under Rule 76(D), against any party or
attorney who has engaged in unreasonable, groundless, abusive or obstructionist conduct. In lieu
of participating in the oral examination, parties may serve written questions in a sealed envelope
on the party taking the deposition and the party taking the deposition shall transmit them to the
officer, who shall propound them to the witness and record the answers verbatim.
D. Length of Deposition; Motion to Terminate or Limit Examination. Depositions shall
be of reasonable length. The oral deposition of any party or witness, including expert witnesses,
whenever taken, shall not exceed four (4) hours in length, except pursuant to stipulation of the
parties or upon motion and a showing of good cause. The court shall impose sanctions pursuant
to Rule 76(D) for unreasonable, groundless, abusive or obstructionist conduct.
At any time during the taking of the deposition, on motion of a party or of the deponent and
upon a showing that the examination is being conducted in bad faith or in such manner as
unreasonably to annoy, embarrass, or oppress the deponent or party, the court in which the action
is pending or the court in the county where the deposition is being taken may order the officer
conducting the examination to cease forthwith from taking the deposition, or may limit the scope
and manner of the taking of the deposition as provided in Rule 53. If the order made terminates
the examination, it shall be resumed thereafter only upon the order of the court in which the
action is pending. Upon demand of the objecting party or deponent, the taking of the deposition
shall be suspended for the time necessary to make a motion for an order. The provisions of Rule
65(A)(4) apply to the award of expenses incurred in relation to the motion.
E. Submission to Witness; Changes; Signing. When the testimony is fully transcribed the
deposition shall be submitted to the witness for examination and shall be read to or by the
witness, unless such examination and reading are waived by the witness and by the parties. Any
changes in form or substance which the witness desires to make shall be entered upon the
deposition by the officer with a statement of the reasons given by the witness for making them.
The deposition shall then be signed by the witness, unless the parties by stipulation waive the
signing or the witness is ill or cannot be found or refuses to sign. If the deposition is not signed
by the witness within thirty (30) days of its submission to the witness, the officer shall sign it and
state on the record the fact of the waiver or of the illness or absence of the witness or the fact of
the refusal to sign together with the reason, if any, given therefor; and the deposition may then be
used as fully as though signed unless on a motion to suppress under Rule 59(D)(4) the court
holds that the reasons given for the refusal to sign require rejection of the deposition in whole or
in part.
F. Certification and Filing by Officer; Exhibits; Copies; Notice of Filing; Preservation
of Verbatim Recording of Depositions.
1. The officer shall certify on the deposition that the witness was duly sworn by the
officer and that the deposition is a true record of the testimony given by the witness.
Documents and things produced for inspection during the examination of the witness,
shall, upon the request of a party, be marked for identification and annexed to the
71deposition, and may be inspected and copied by any party, except that if the person
producing the materials desires to retain them the person may (1) offer copies to be
marked for identification and annexed to the deposition and to serve thereafter as
originals if the person affords to all parties fair opportunity to verify the copies by
comparison with the originals, or (2) offer the originals to be marked for identification,
after giving to each party an opportunity to inspect and copy them, in which event the
materials may then be used in the same manner as if annexed to the deposition. Any
party may move for an order that the original be annexed to and returned with the
deposition to the court, pending final disposition of the case.
2. Upon payment of reasonable charges therefor, the officer shall furnish a copy of
the deposition to any party or to the deponent.
3. The officer shall retain all original stenographic notes and tapes of any
deposition and a copy of the recording of any deposition taken by another method in
such place and manner as to ensure their availability to the court or any party upon
request. In no event, however, shall such original notes or stenographic tapes be
retained in any location outside the State of Arizona. The officer shall retain
stenographic notes, tapes, and copies of recordings taken by another method according
to records retention and disposition schedules and purge lists adopted by the Supreme
Court.
G. Failure to Attend or to Serve Subpoena; Expenses.
1. If the party giving the notice of the taking of a deposition fails to attend and
proceed therewith, and another party attends in person or by attorney pursuant to the
notice, the court may order the party giving the notice to pay to such other party the
reasonable expenses incurred by that party and that party's attorney in attending,
including reasonable attorney’s fees.
2. If the party giving the notice of the taking of a deposition of a non-party witness
fails to serve a subpoena upon the witness, and the witness because of such failure does
not attend, and if another party attends in person or by attorney because that party
expects the deposition of that witness to be taken, the court may order the party giving
the notice to pay to such other party the reasonable expenses incurred by that party and
that party's attorney in attending, including reasonable attorneys’ fees.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based upon Rule 30, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 58. Depositions upon Written Questions
A. Serving Questions; Notice. After commencement of the action, any party may take the
testimony of any person, including a party, by deposition upon written questions. The attendance
of witnesses may be compelled by the use of subpoena as provided in Rule 52. The deposition of
a person in confinement may be taken only by leave of court on such terms as the court
prescribes. A party desiring to take a deposition upon written questions shall serve them upon
72every other party with a notice stating (1) the name and address of the person who is to answer
them, if known, and if the name is not known, a general description sufficient to identify the
person or the particular class or group to which the person belongs, and (2) the name or
descriptive title and address of the officer before whom the deposition is to be taken. A
deposition upon written questions may be taken of a public or private corporation or a
partnership or association or governmental agency in accordance with the provisions of Rule
57(B)(6). Within thirty (30) days after the notice and written questions are served, a party may
serve cross questions upon all other parties. Within ten (10) days after being served with cross
questions, a party may serve redirect questions upon all other parties. Within ten (10) days after
being served with redirect questions, a party may serve re-cross questions upon all other parties.
The court may for cause shown enlarge or shorten the time.
B. Officer to Take Responses and Prepare Record. A copy of the notice and copies of all
questions served shall be delivered by the party taking the deposition to the officer designated in
the notice, who shall proceed promptly, in the manner provided by Rule 57(C), (E), and (F), to
take the testimony of the witness in response to the questions and to prepare, certify, and file or
mail the deposition, attaching thereto the copy of the notice and the questions received by the
officer.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based upon Rule 31, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 59. Use of Depositions in Court Proceedings
A. Use of Depositions. At the trial or at any hearing any part or all of a deposition, so far as
admissible under the rules of evidence applied as though the witness were then present and
testifying, may be used against any party who was present or represented at the taking of the
deposition or who had reasonable notice thereof, and had an opportunity and similar motive to
develop the testimony by direct, cross, or redirect examination. The party who seeks admission
of said testimony by deposition may do so without proof of the deponent's unavailability to
testify at trial. Nothing contained in this rule shall be construed to limit in any way the right of
any party to call the deposed witness to testify in person at trial.
If only part of a deposition is offered in evidence by a party, the court may require the
offeror to introduce contemporaneously any other part which ought in fairness to be considered
together with the part introduced.
Substitution of parties pursuant to Rule 37 does not affect the right to use depositions
previously taken. When an action has been brought in any court of the United States or of any
state, and another action involving the same subject matter is afterward brought between the
same parties or their representatives or successors in interest, all depositions lawfully taken and
duly filed in the former action may be used in the latter as if originally taken therefore. A
deposition previously taken may also be used as permitted by Rule 2(B) of these rules.
B. Objections to Admissibility. Subject to the provisions of Rule 55(B) and subdivision
(D)(3) of this rule, objection may be made at the trial or hearing to receiving in evidence any
73deposition or part thereof for any reason that would require the exclusion of the evidence if the
witness were then present and testifying.
C. Form of Presentation. A party offering deposition testimony may offer it in the form
permitted by Rules 57(B)(4) and (C). A party intending to offer deposition testimony at trial or
hearing shall designate the portions to be offered by page and line reference and the party or
parties against whom they will be offered. This designation shall be made in any pretrial or pre-
hearing statement required by the court. If deposition testimony is offered in any form for any
purpose, the offering party shall provide the court with a transcript of the portions offered.
D. Effect of Errors and Irregularities in Depositions.
1. As to Notice. All errors and irregularities in the notice for taking a deposition are
waived unless written objection is promptly served upon the party giving the notice.
2. As to Disqualification of Officer. Objection to taking a deposition because of
disqualification of the officer before whom it is to be taken is waived unless made
before the taking of the deposition begins or as soon thereafter as the disqualification
becomes known or could be discovered with reasonable diligence.
3. As to Taking of Deposition.
a. Objections to the competency of a witness or to the competency,
relevancy, or materiality of testimony are not waived by failure to make them
before or during the taking of the deposition, unless the ground of the objection
is one which might have been obviated or removed if presented at that time.
b. Errors and irregularities occurring at the oral examination in the manner
of taking the deposition, in the form of the questions or answers, in the oath or
affirmation, or in the conduct of parties, and errors of any kind which might be
obviated, removed, or cured if promptly presented, are waived unless
seasonable objection thereto is made at the taking of the deposition.
c. Objections to the form of written questions submitted under Rule 58 are
waived unless served in writing upon the party propounding them within the
time allowed for serving the succeeding cross or other questions and within
five (5) days after service of the last questions authorized.
d. Objections to the form of the question or responsiveness of the answer
shall be concise, and shall not suggest answers to the witness. No specification
of the defect in the form of the question or the answer shall be stated unless
requested by the party propounding the question. Argumentative interruptions
shall not be permitted.
e. Continuous and unwarranted off the record conferences between the
deponent and counsel following the propounding of questions and prior to the
answer or at any time during the deposition are prohibited. This conduct is
subject to the proscriptions of subdivision D(3)(d) and the sanctions prescribed
in Rule 65.
744. As to completion and return of deposition. Errors and irregularities in the manner
in which the testimony is transcribed or the deposition is prepared, signed, certified,
sealed, indorsed, transmitted, filed, or otherwise dealt with by the officer under Rules
57 and 58 are waived unless a motion to suppress the deposition or some part thereof is
made with reasonable promptness after such defect is, or with due diligence might have
been, ascertained.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based upon Rule 32, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 60. Interrogatories to Parties
A. Availability; Procedures for Use. Any party may serve upon any other party written
interrogatories to be answered by the party served or, if the party served is a public or private
corporation, a partnership, an association, or a governmental agency, by any officer or agent,
who shall furnish such information as is available to the party. Interrogatories may be served
without leave of court upon the petitioner after commencement of the action and upon any other
party with or after service of the summons and petition upon that party. Each interrogatory shall
be answered separately and fully in writing under oath, unless it is objected to, in which event
the reasons for objection shall be stated in lieu of an answer. The answers are to be signed by the
person making them, and the objections signed by the attorney making them. The party upon
whom the interrogatories have been served shall serve a copy of the answers, and objections if
any, within forty (40) days after the service of the interrogatories, except that a respondent may
serve answers or objections within sixty (60) days after service of the summons and petition
upon that defendant respondent, or execution of a waiver of service, by that respondent. The
court may allow a shorter or longer time. The party submitting the interrogatories may move for
an order under Rule 65(A) with respect to any objection to or other failure to answer an
interrogatory.
B. Scope; Use at Trial. Interrogatories may relate to any matters which can be inquired into
under Rule 51(B), and the answers may be used to the extent permitted by Rule 2(B) of these
rules. An interrogatory otherwise proper is not necessarily objectionable merely because an
answer to the interrogatory involves an opinion or contention that relates to fact or the
application of law to fact, but the court may order that such an interrogatory need not be
answered until after designated discovery has been completed or until a pretrial conference or
other later time.
C. Option to Produce Business, Medical, Therapeutic, Psychological, Psychiatric,
Employment, and Income Tax or Education Records. Where the answer to an interrogatory
may be derived or ascertained from the business, medical, therapeutic, psychological,
psychiatric, employment, and income tax or education records of the party upon whom the
interrogatory has been served or that party’s minor child or children, or from an examination,
audit, or inspection of such business, medical, therapeutic, psychological, psychiatric,
employment, and income tax or education records, including a compilation, abstract, or summary
thereof, and the burden of deriving or ascertaining the answer is substantially the same for the
party serving the interrogatory as for the party served, it is a sufficient answer to such
interrogatory to specify the records from which the answer may be derived or ascertained and to
75afford to the party serving the interrogatory reasonable opportunity to examine, audit, or inspect
such records and to make copies, compilations, abstracts, or summaries. A specification shall be
in sufficient detail to permit the interrogating party to locate and to identify, as readily as can the
party served, the records from which the answer may be derived or ascertained. The party
responding to the interrogatory shall provide appropriate and specific signed releases to the
propounding party authorizing that party’s access to the specific information.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based upon Rule 33, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 61. Uniform and Non-Uniform Interrogatories; Limitations; Procedure
A. Presumptive Limitations. Except as provided in these rules, a party shall not serve upon
any other party more than forty (40) interrogatories, which may be any combination of uniform
or non-uniform interrogatories. Any uniform interrogatory and its subparts shall be counted as
one interrogatory. Any subpart to a non-uniform interrogatory shall be considered as a separate
interrogatory.
B. Stipulations to Serve Additional Interrogatories. If a party believes that good cause
exists for the service of more than forty (40) interrogatories upon any other party, that party shall
consult with the party upon whom the additional interrogatories would be served and attempt to
secure a written stipulation as to the number of additional interrogatories that may be served.
C. Leave of Court to Serve Additional Interrogatories. If a stipulation permitting the
service of additional interrogatories is not secured, a party desiring to serve additional
interrogatories may do so only by leave of court. Upon written motion or application showing
good cause therefore, the court in its discretion may grant to a party leave to serve a reasonable
number of additional interrogatories upon any other party. The party seeking leave to serve
additional interrogatories shall have the burden of establishing that the issues presented in the
action warrant the service of additional interrogatories, or that such additional interrogatories are
a more practical or less burdensome method of obtaining the information sought, or other good
cause therefor. No such motion or application may be heard or considered by the court unless
accompanied by the proposed additional interrogatories to be served, and by the certification of
counsel required by Rule 65(A)(2)(c). The proposed additional interrogatories shall only be
attached to the judge's copy of the motion and the copy served on opposing parties.
D. Spacing. Whenever interrogatories are used, a space sufficient for the answer shall be left
immediately below the question. The answering party shall insert the answer in the space below
each interrogatory, or if it requires more space, on a separate sheet which restates the question
before giving the answer.
E. Non-uniform Interrogatories. The method of propounding and answering Non-Uniform
Interrogatories shall be as follows.
1. A party propounding interrogatories, other than Uniform Interrogatories, shall
serve upon the answering party, and not the clerk of the court, the original and one (1)
copy of the interrogatories and shall serve a copy upon every other party.
762. The answering party shall, within the time permitted by law, serve upon the
propounding party and all other parties one copy of the interrogatories and answers.
F. Uniform Interrogatories. The interrogatories set forth in Rule 97, Form 7, titled
Uniform Family Law Interrogatories, are approved for use as a standard or guide in preparation
by counsel of interrogatories under Rule 60. The use of Uniform Interrogatories shall be
governed by Rule 60 and this rule. The use of Uniform Interrogatories is not mandatory and
should serve as a guide only. They are not to be used as a standard set of interrogatories for
submission in all cases. Each interrogatory should be used only where it fits the particular case.
The method of propounding and answering Uniform Interrogatories shall be as follows:
1. A party propounding Uniform Interrogatories shall serve a copy of a Notice of
Service of Uniform Interrogatories upon each other party to the action.
2. The Notice of Service of Uniform Interrogatories shall contain the names of the
party and attorney to whom the request is made and each uniform interrogatory for
which the propounding party requests an answer.
3. The answering party shall:
a. insert the answer below the propounded interrogatory; and
b. serve the original upon the propounding party and a copy upon all other
parties.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based upon Rule 33.1, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 62. Other Purposes
Production of Documents and Things and Entry upon Land for Inspection and
A. Scope. Any party may serve on any other party requests (1) to produce and permit the
party making the request, or someone acting on the requester's behalf, to inspect and copy any
designated documents (including writings, drawings, graphs, charts, photographs, and other data
compilations from which information can be obtained, translated through detection devices into
reasonable usable form when translation is practicably necessary) or to inspect and copy, test, or
sample any tangible things that constitute or contain matters within the scope of Rule 51(B) and
that are in the possession, custody, or control of the party upon whom the request is served; or
(2) to permit entry upon designated land or other property in the possession or control of the
party upon whom the request is served for the purpose of inspection and measuring, appraising,
inventorying personal property, surveying, photographing, testing, or sampling the property or
any designated object or operation thereon, within the scope of Rule 51(B).
B. Procedure and Limitations. The requests may, without leave of court, be served upon
the petitioner after commencement of the action and upon any other party with or after service of
the summons and petition upon that party. The requests shall set forth the items to be inspected,
either by individual item or by specific category, and describe each item and specific category
77with reasonable particularity. The request(s) shall not, without leave of court, cumulatively
include more than ten (10) distinct items or specific categories of items. Each request shall
specify a reasonable time, place, and manner of making the inspection and performing the related
acts. If a party believes that good cause exists for more than ten (10) distinct items or categories
of items, that party shall consult with the party upon whom a request would be served and
attempt to secure a written stipulation to that effect. The party upon whom a request is served
shall serve a written response within forty (40) days after the service of the request, except that a
respondent may serve a response within sixty (60) days after service of the summons and petition
upon that respondent, or execution of a waiver of service by that respondent. The court may
allow a shorter or longer time. The response shall state, with respect to each item or category,
that inspection and related activities will be permitted as requested, unless the request is objected
to, in which event the reasons for objection shall be stated. If objection is made to part of an item
or category, the part shall be specified. The party submitting a request may move for an order
under Rule 65(A) with respect to any objection to or other failure to respond to the request or any
part thereof, or any failure to permit inspection as requested. A party who produced documents
for inspection shall produce them as they are kept in the usual course of business or shall
organize and label them to correspond with the categories in the request.
C. Persons not Parties. A person not a party to the action may be compelled to produce
documents and things or to submit to an inspection as provided in Rule 52.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based upon Rule 34, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 63. Physical, Mental and Vocational Evaluations of Persons
A. Order for Evaluation. When the mental, physical, or vocational condition of a party or
any other person is in controversy, the court may order that person to submit to a physical,
mental, or vocational evaluation by a designated expert or to produce for evaluation the person in
the party's custody or legal control. The order may be made only on motion for good cause
shown and upon notice to the person to be evaluated (unless the person to be evaluated is a minor
child of one or both of the parties), and to all parties and shall specify the time, place, manner,
conditions, and scope of the evaluation and the person or persons by whom it is to be made. The
person to be evaluated shall have the right to have a representative present during the evaluation,
unless the presence of that representative may adversely affect the outcome of the evaluation.
The person to be evaluated shall have the right to record by audiotape any physical evaluation. A
mental or vocational evaluation may be recorded by audiotape, unless such recording may
adversely affect the outcome of the evaluation. A copy of any record made of a physical,
mental, or vocational evaluation shall be provided to any party upon request.
B. Report of Evaluator.
1. If requested by the party against whom an order is made under paragraph A or
the person evaluated, the party causing the evaluation to be made shall deliver to the
requester, within twenty (20) days of the evaluation, a copy of the detailed written
report of the evaluator setting out the evaluator's findings, including the results of all
tests made, diagnoses and conditions, together with like reports of all earlier evaluations
78of the same condition and copies of all written or recorded notes filled out by the
evaluator and the person evaluated at the time of the evaluation, providing access to the
original written or recorded notes for purposes of comparing same with the copies.
After delivery the party causing the evaluation shall be entitled upon request to receive
from the party against whom the order is made a like report of any evaluation,
previously or thereafter made, of the same condition, unless, in the case of a report of
evaluation of a person not a party, the party shows that such party is unable to obtain it.
The court, on motion, may order a party to deliver a report on such terms as are just,
and if any expert fails or refuses to make a report the court may exclude the expert’s
testimony.
2. By requesting and obtaining a report of the evaluation so ordered or by taking
the deposition of the evaluator, the party evaluated waives any privilege the party may
have in that action, or any other involving the same controversy, regarding the
testimony of every other person who has evaluated or may thereafter evaluate the party
in respect of the same mental, physical or vocational condition.
3. Paragraph B applies to evaluations made by agreement of the parties, unless the
agreement expressly provides otherwise. Paragraph B does not preclude discovery of a
report of any expert or the taking of a deposition of any expert in accordance with the
provisions of any other rule.
C. Alternate Procedure; Notice of Evaluation; Objections.
1. When the parties agree that a mental, physical, or vocational evaluation is
appropriate but do not agree as to the evaluator, the party desiring the evaluation may
seek it by giving reasonable notice in writing to every other party to the action not less
than thirty (30) days in advance. The notice shall specify the name of the person to be
evaluated, the time, place and scope of the evaluation, and the person or persons by
whom it is to be made. The person to be physically evaluated shall have the right to
have a representative present during the evaluation, unless the presence of that
representative may adversely affect the outcome of the evaluation. The person to be
evaluated shall have the right to record by audiotape any physical evaluation. A mental
or vocational evaluation may be recorded by audiotape, unless such recording may
adversely affect the outcome of the evaluation. Upon good cause shown, a physical,
mental, or vocational evaluation may be video-recorded. A copy of any record made of
a physical, mental, or vocational evaluation shall be provided to any party upon request.
2. Upon motion by a party or by the person to be evaluated, and for good cause
shown, the court in which the action is pending may, in addition to other orders
appropriate under paragraph A, order that the evaluation be made by an expert other
than the one specified in the notice. If a party after being served with a proper notice
under this subdivision does not make a motion under this rule and fails to appear for the
evaluation or to produce for the evaluation the person in the party's custody or legal
control, the court in which the action is pending may, on motion, make such orders in
regard to the failure as are just, such as those specified in Rule 65(D).
793. The provisions of paragraph B shall apply to an evaluation made under this
paragraph C.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based upon Rule 35, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 64. Requests for Admission
A. Request for Admission Regarding Authenticity of Documents. A party may serve
upon any other party a written request for the admission, for purposes of the pending action only,
of the truth of any matters within the scope of Rule 51(B) set forth in the request that relate to
statements or opinions of fact or of the application of law to fact, including the genuineness of
any documents described in the request. Copies of documents shall be served with the request.
The request may, without leave of court, be served upon the petitioner after commencement of
the action and upon any other party with or after service of the summons and petition upon that
party. Each matter for which an admission is requested shall be separately set forth. The matter is
admitted unless, within forty (40) days after service of the request, or, in the case of a
respondent, within sixty (60) days after service of the summons and petition upon that
respondent or execution of a waiver of service by that respondent, or within such shorter or
longer time as the court may allow, the party to whom the request is directed serves upon the
party requesting the admission a written answer or objection addressed to the matter, signed by
the party or by the party's attorney. If objection is made, the reasons therefor shall be stated. The
answer shall specifically deny the authenticity of any document of documents or set forth in
detail the reasons why the answering party cannot truthfully admit or deny the request. A denial
shall fairly meet the substance of the requested admission, and when good faith requires that a
party qualify an answer or deny only a part of the matter for which an admission is requested, the
party shall specify so much of it as is true and qualify or deny the remainder. An answering party
may not give lack of information or knowledge as a reason for failure to admit or deny unless the
party states that the party has made reasonable inquiry and that the information known or readily
obtainable by the party is insufficient to enable the party to admit or deny. A party who considers
that a matter for which an admission has been requested presents a genuine issue for trial may
not, on that ground alone, object to the request; the party may, subject to the provisions of Rule
65(C), deny the matter or set forth reasons why the party cannot admit or deny it. The party who
has requested the admissions may move to determine the sufficiency of the answers or
objections. Unless the court determines that an objection is justified, it shall order that an answer
be served. If the court determines that an answer does not comply with the requirements of this
rule, it may order either that the matter is admitted or that an amended answer be served. The
court may, in lieu of these orders, determine that final disposition of the request be made at a pre-
trial conference or at a designated time prior to trial.
B. Procedure. Each request shall contain only one (1) request for genuineness of all
documents or categories of documents. Each party shall be entitled to submit no more than
twenty-five (25) requests in any case without leave of court, except upon agreement of all parties
or upon order of the court for good cause shown.
C. Effect of Admission. Any matter admitted under this rule is conclusively established
unless the court for good cause shown permits withdrawal or amendment of the admission. Any
80admission made by a party under this rule is for the purpose of the pending action only and is not
an admission for any other purpose, nor may it be used against the party in any other proceeding.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based upon Rule 36, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 65. Failure to Make Disclosure or Discovery; Sanctions
A. Motion for Order Compelling Disclosure or Discovery. A party, upon reasonable
notice to other parties and all persons affected thereby, may apply for an order compelling
disclosure or discovery as follows.
1. Appropriate Court. An application for an order to a party may be made to the
court in the county in which the action is pending, or, in matters relating to a deposition,
to the court in the county where the deposition is being taken. An application for an
order to a person who is not a party shall be made to the court in the county where the
discovery is being, or is to be, taken.
2. Motion.
a. If a party fails to make a disclosure required by Rule 49 or 50, any other
party may move to compel disclosure and for appropriate sanctions.
b. If a deponent fails to answer a question propounded or submitted under
Rule 57 or 58, or a corporation or other entity fails to make a designation under
Rule 57(B)(6) or 58(A), or a party fails to answer an interrogatory submitted
under Rule 60, or if a party, in response to a request for inspection submitted
under Rule 61, fails to respond that inspection will be permitted as requested or
fails to permit inspection as requested, the discovering party may move for an
order compelling an answer, or a designation, or an order compelling
inspection in accordance with the request. When taking a deposition on oral
examination, the proponent of the question may complete or adjourn the
examination before applying for an order.
c. No motion brought under this rule will be considered or scheduled
unless a separate statement of the moving party is attached thereto certifying
that, after personal consultation and good faith efforts to do so, counsel have
been unable to satisfactorily resolve the matter.
3. Evasive or Incomplete Disclosure, Answer, or Response. For purposes of this
subdivision an evasive or incomplete disclosure, answer, or response is to be treated as
a failure to disclose, answer, or respond.
4. Expenses and Sanctions.
a. If the motion is granted or if the disclosure or requested discovery is
provided after the motion was filed, the court shall, after affording an
81opportunity to be heard, require the party or deponent whose conduct
necessitated the motion or the party or attorney advising such conduct or both
of them to pay the moving party the reasonable expenses incurred in making
the motion, including attorneys’ fees, unless the court finds that the motion
was filed without the movant's first making a good faith effort to obtain the
disclosure or discovery without court action, or that the opposing party's
nondisclosure, response, or objection was substantially justified or that other
circumstances make an award of expenses unjust.
b. If the motion is denied, the court may enter any protective order
authorized under Rule 53 and shall, after affording an opportunity to be heard,
require the moving party or the attorney filing the motion or both of them to
pay to the party or deponent who opposed the motion the reasonable expenses
incurred in opposing the motion, including attorneys’ fees, unless the court
finds that the making of the motion was substantially justified or that other
circumstances make an award of expenses unjust.
c. If the motion is granted in part and denied in part, the court may enter
any protective order authorized under Rule 53 and may, after affording an
opportunity to be heard, apportion the reasonable expenses incurred in relation
to the motion among the parties and persons in a just manner.
B. Failure to Comply with Order.
1. Sanctions by court in county where deposition is taken. If a deponent fails to be
sworn or to answer a question after being directed to do so by the court in the county in
which the deposition is being taken, the failure may be considered a contempt of that
court.
2. Sanctions by court in which action is pending. If a party or an officer, director, or
managing agent of a party or a person designated under Rule 57(B)(6) or 58(A) to
testify on behalf of a party fails to obey an order to provide or permit discovery,
including an order made under paragraph A or Rule 63, the court in which the action is
pending may make such orders in regard to the failure as are just, and among others the
following:
a. an order that the matters regarding which the order was made or any
other designated facts shall be taken to be established for the purposes of the
action, in accordance with the claim of the party obtaining the order;
b. an order refusing to allow the disobedient party to support or oppose
designated claims or defenses, or prohibiting that party from introducing
designated matters in evidence;
c. an order striking out pleadings or parts thereof, or staying further
proceedings until the order is obeyed, or dismissing the action or proceeding or
any part thereof, or rendering a judgment by default against the disobedient
party;
82d. in lieu of any of the foregoing orders or in addition thereto, an order
treating as a contempt of court the failure to obey any orders, except an order
to submit to a physical or mental examination;
e. where a party has failed to comply with an order under Rule 63(A)
requiring that party to produce another for examination, such orders as are
listed in subdivisions 2(a), (b), and (c) of this rule, unless the party failing to
comply shows that that party is unable to produce such person for examination.
In lieu of any of the foregoing orders or in addition thereto, the court shall require the
party failing to obey the order or the attorney advising that party or both to pay the
reasonable expenses, including attorneys’ fees, caused by the failure, unless the court
finds that the failure was substantially justified or that other circumstances make an
award of expenses unjust.
C. Failure to Disclose; False or Misleading Disclosure; Untimely Disclosure.
1. A party who fails to timely disclose information required by Rule 49 or 50 shall
not, unless such failure is harmless, be permitted to use as evidence at trial, at a hearing,
or on a motion, the information or witness not disclosed, except by leave of court for
good cause shown. A party or attorney who makes a disclosure pursuant to Rule 49 or
50 that the party or attorney knew or should have known was inaccurate or incomplete
and thereby causes an opposing party to engage in investigation or discovery, shall be
ordered by the court to reimburse the opposing party for the cost, including attorneys’
fees, of such investigation or discovery. In addition to or in lieu of these sanctions, the
court on motion of a party or on the court's own motion, and after affording an
opportunity to be heard, may impose other appropriate sanctions. In addition to
requiring payment of reasonable expenses, including attorneys’ fees, caused by the
failure, these sanctions may include any of the actions authorized under subdivisions
2(a), (b), and (c) under paragraph B and may include informing the jury of the failure to
make the disclosure.
2. A party seeking to use information that that party first disclosed later than thirty
(30) days before trial must obtain leave of court by motion, supported by affidavit, to
extend the time for disclosure. Such information shall not be used unless the motion
establishes and the court finds:
a. that the information would be allowed under the standards of
subdivision C(1), notwithstanding the short time remaining before trial; and
b. that the information was disclosed as soon as practicable after its
discovery.
3. A party seeking to use information that that party first disclosed during trial must
obtain leave of court by motion, supported by affidavit, to extend the time for
disclosure. Such information shall not be used unless the motion establishes and the
court finds:
83a. that the information could not have been discovered and disclosed
earlier even with due diligence; and
b. that the information was disclosed immediately upon its discovery.
D. Failure to Disclose Unfavorable Information. A party's or attorney's knowing failure to
timely disclose damaging or unfavorable information, as required pursuant to Rules 49 and 50 or
in response to discovery propounded pursuant to these rules, shall be grounds for imposition of
sanctions, in the court's discretion, up to and including dismissal of the claim or defense.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based upon Rule 37, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
84VIII. SETTLEMENT AND ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE
RESOLUTION (ADR)
Rule 66. Alternative Dispute Resolution: Purpose, Definitions, Initiation, and Duty
A. Purpose. The intent of this section is to encourage the resolution of family law cases
using non-adversarial means of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) to the greatest extent
possible, whether through a program overseen, administered, or authorized by the court, or by a
person or agency independent of the court. Mediation independent of the court is encouraged.
B. Definitions. The court may provide or authorize ADR processes, which may include, but
are not necessarily limited to, the following:
1. “Arbitration” means a process in which parties agree to submit the issue(s) in
the dispute to a neutral third party or parties retained by the parties for a binding
decision, in accordance with the Arizona Arbitration Act, A.R.S. §§ 12-1501 to 1518.
2. “Parenting Coordinator” is a person appointed by the court to assist with
implementation of court orders by making recommendations to the court regarding
implementation, clarification, modification, and enforcement of custody and parenting
time orders.
3. “Family Law Master” is a person appointed by the court, including a family law
conference officer, to take evidence on one or more disputed issues and submit a report
to the court containing findings of fact and conclusions of law.
4. “Mediation” means a voluntary confidential process in which parties enter into
one or more private discussions with a neutral third party to resolve the dispute.
Mediation can be conducted by a conciliation court counselor, a mediator assigned by
the court from a court roster of mediators, or a private mediator retained by the parties.
5. “Open Negotiation” means a process of non-confidential negotiations between
the parties conducted by a neutral third party (the negotiator) to attempt to resolve their
dispute. In the event the parties are unable to resolve some or all of the issues in the
dispute, the negotiator reports the disputed issues to the court.
6. “Settlement Conference” means a confidential process, except as provided in
subdivision D(7) of this rule, in which parties to a dispute meet with a judge,
commissioner, or judge pro tempore acting as a neutral third party to engage in
settlement discussions.
7. “Other ADR Processes.” The court may create, administer, approve, or
authorize other ADR processes designed to provide the parties, who are or have been
involved in, or are contemplating the filing of a family law matter, with an opportunity
to resolve their dispute without court litigation.
85C. Initiation of ADR. Upon the court’s own motion or the motion of any party, the court
may direct the parties to participate in one or more ADR processes authorized by court rules or
to a private dispute resolution process agreed upon by the parties.
D. Duty to Consider ADR. No later than ninety (90) days following the first appearance of
a respondent, the parties shall confer, either in person or by telephone, about:
1. the possibilities for a prompt settlement or resolution of the case; and
2. whether they might benefit from participating in some alternative dispute
resolution process, the type of process that would be most appropriate in their case, the
selection of an ADR service provider, and the scheduling of the proceedings.
E. Duty to Attempt Settlement, Agree on ADR, and Report to Court. The attorneys of
record and all unrepresented parties who have appeared in the case are jointly responsible for
attempting in good faith to settle the case or agree on an ADR process and for reporting the
outcome of their conference to the court. Within thirty (30) days after their conference or at the
Resolution Management Conference, whichever is earlier, the parties shall inform the court,
(using Rule 97, Form 6, or a form substantially similar) of the following:
1. if the parties have agreed to use a specific ADR process, the type of ADR
process to be used, the name and address of the ADR service provider they will use, and
the date by which the ADR proceedings are anticipated to be completed;
2. if the parties have not agreed to use a specific ADR process, the position of each
party as to the type of ADR process appropriate for the case or, in the alternative, why
ADR is not appropriate; and
3. if any party requests that the court conduct a conference to consider ADR.
F. Assistance in Choosing Appropriate ADR Process. Unless the parties have agreed to
use a specific ADR process, the court may direct the parties, the attorneys for the parties and, if
appropriate, representatives of the parties having authority to settle, to discuss with a court-
appointed ADR specialist, either in person or by telephone, whether ADR is appropriate and the
types of ADR processes that might benefit their case.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 16(g), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 67. Mediation, Arbitration, Settlement Conferences, and Other Dispute Resolution
Processes Outside of Conciliation Court Services
A. Confidentiality; Ex parte Communications. Mediation conferences shall be held in
private, and all communications, verbal or written, shall be confidential. The mediator shall not
file any written report or statement with the court, except as provided by subdivision B(6).
Unless specifically stated otherwise in these rules, the provisions of A.R.S. § 12-2238 shall apply
to any mediation conference held in conformance with this rule. The mediator shall not have any
ex parte communication with the judge or commissioner assigned to a case, except as provided
86in subdivision B(7). The mediator may not conduct any other form of dispute resolution process
in the same case, unless agreed to by the parties and approved by the court.
B. Mediation. Any issues in dispute may be subject to mediation. Mediation may be
conducted by a private mediator agreed upon by the parties, a mediator assigned by the court
from a roster of mediators maintained by the court, or a mediator participating in an ADR
process overseen, administered, or approved by the court.
1. Private Mediation; Roster of Mediators. The parties may select a private
mediator by agreement. The parties or counsel, if any, shall sign and file with the court
a written notice that private mediation will take place, stating the name of the mediator
and date set for the initial mediation conference. The parties may request the court to
choose an independent mediator from a list of mediators supplied by them or from a
roster of mediators maintained by the court. The parties shall contract directly with the
private mediator and be responsible for payment of the fees for such mediation. Unless
the court orders or the parties agree otherwise, the cost of mediation shall be equally
shared by the parties. The mediator may not conduct any subsequent family assessment
or evaluation in the same case.
2. Commencement of Mediation. On its own motion, or on motion of either or both
parties to a dispute, the court may order a matter referred to mediation. The court may
decline to order a matter referred to mediation if it appears that mediation is
inappropriate for reasons such as parental unfitness, substance abuse, mental incapacity,
domestic violence, or other good cause, or that mediation will cause undue delay.
3. Domestic Violence.
a. In a proceeding concerning custody or parenting time of a child, if an
order of protection is in effect involving the parties or there is a finding by the
court of any conduct that would form the basis for an order of protection, the
court may order mediation or refer the parties to mediation only if there are
policies and procedures in place that protect the victim from harm, harassment,
or intimidation.
b. Every party shall be notified in writing or orally in open court prior to
mediation of the ability to request a waiver of mediation or to request that
reasonable procedures be in place at the mediation to protect a victim of
domestic violence, as determined by the court. Neither party shall be required
to appear for mediation pending determination of this matter.
c. The mediator shall reject for mediation or terminate mediation in any
case the mediator deems mediation to be inappropriate because of domestic
violence.
4. Prohibition against Default. Upon entry of an order or referral to mediation,
neither party to the dispute may apply for entry of default against the other party until
the mediator files a report with the court advising the court that mediation has
concluded, unless otherwise ordered by the court.
875. Scheduling of Mediation Conferences; Persons Who May Attend. When an order
or referral to mediation has been entered, the mediator will schedule a conjoint or
individual conference or conferences that each party must attend. No scheduled trial or
hearing shall be continued for failure to complete mediation without order of the court.
Counsel for a party shall not be excluded from a mediation conference unless agreed to
by the party and counsel. When appropriate, the mediator may, in his or her sole
discretion, permit persons other than a party and counsel to attend or participate in a
mediation conference if they agree in writing to be bound by the confidentiality
provisions of this rule.
6. Pre-Mediation Statement. The mediator may require the parties to prepare a Pre-
Mediation Statement for the mediator setting forth the information contained in
subdivision D(2). The court may impose sanctions as permitted by Rule 71 for failure of
a party to submit a Pre-Mediation Statement as requested by the mediator. The Pre-
Mediation Statement shall not be filed with the court.
7. Report to the Court; Agreements. If the court refers or orders a case to
mediation, the parties shall notify the court that the mediation has concluded and advise
the court of any agreements reached within ten (10) days after the conclusion of the
mediation and not later than ten (10) days prior to the date set for trial or hearing. All
binding agreements reached by the parties shall comply with Rule 69. As part of any
agreement reached, the parties shall acknowledge that the agreement was entered into
by them voluntarily and without undue influence, after full disclosure of all relevant
facts and information, and is intended to be a final binding agreement pursuant to these
rules, and that it is fair, equitable and in the best interests of the children. If no or partial
agreement is reached during mediation, the mediator shall file a brief report with the
court stating that the parties met and attempted to resolve their differences but the
mediation was unsuccessful. The report shall also state any agreements reached and the
issues remaining for resolution. The mediator shall not report the positions of the parties
and shall not comment upon or offer any opinion about the position of any party. The
mediator may also advise the court if the parties or the mediator believe that further
mediation would be helpful to resolving the remaining issues.
8. Failure to Appear. After entry of an order referring a matter for mediation, the
parties are required to appear at all mediation conferences scheduled by the mediator. If
one or both parties fail to appear, the mediator shall report to the court the identity of
each person who failed to appear, and the court may impose sanctions as permitted by
Rule 71.
9. Participation in the Process; Reports to the Court; Sanctions. Although a party
is required to appear for a mediation conference, participation in mediation is voluntary.
The mediator may advise the court in writing about the schedule for mediation and any
procedural matter related to the mediation, so long as the substance of what was said or
done by the parties or their counsel during mediation remains confidential. Other than
reporting to the court about matters set forth in this rule, unless otherwise agreed by the
parties or required or permitted by law, the mediator shall not report to the court about
anything that was said or done before or during the mediation. For violation of this
rule, the court may impose appropriate sanctions as permitted by Rule 71.
88C. Arbitration. The parties may agree to arbitrate any and all issues in accordance with the
Arizona Arbitration Act, A.R.S. §§ 12-1501 to 1518 or any other law permitting arbitration. The
parties or counsel, if any, shall file with the court a written notice of their agreement to arbitrate
some or all of the issues before the court, attaching their written agreement to arbitrate, stating
the name of the arbitrator(s), and the date(s) of arbitration. The decision of the arbitrator(s) shall
be submitted to the court for a determination that said decision conforms to statute for entry of a
decree or other written orders in accordance therewith. The parties shall contract directly with
the arbitrator(s) and be responsible for payment of any fees for such arbitration.
D. Settlement Conferences. Upon motion of any party, or upon the court’s own motion, the
court may direct the parties to attend a settlement conference. Upon agreement of the parties, the
settlement conference may be conducted by the judge or commissioner presiding over the action.
The court may direct that the settlement conference be conducted by another judge or
commissioner of the court, or by a judge pro tempore as part of any ADR program overseen,
administered, or authorized by the court.
1. Procedures. At the request of a party or on its own motion, the court may direct
the parties, the attorneys for the parties, and any other person deemed necessary to
facilitate settlement of the issues, to participate in the settlement conference. The court
may enter an order setting the date for the conference and enter other orders appropriate
under the circumstances of the case to facilitate the settlement conference.
2. Memoranda. Except as otherwise ordered by the court, at least one week before
the settlement conference the parties shall furnish the settlement conference officer with
their Settlement Conference Memoranda or a Pretrial Statement addressing the
following:
a. a general description of the issues in dispute, the party’s position on
each issue and the evidence that will be presented to support the party’s
position;
b. where the issues involve financial matters, the memorandum shall
include a current Affidavit of Financial Information, a list of outstanding debts
and the party responsible for each debt, and an inventory of community or joint
assets, including dates of acquisition, amounts of encumbrance, and present
value;
c. a summary of the negotiations that have previously occurred; and
d. any other information the party believes will be helpful to the settlement
of the issues.
The Settlement Conference Memorandum shall not be filed with the court.
3. Ex Parte Communication. At any settlement conference conducted pursuant to
this rule, the court, with consent of all those participating in the conference, may engage
in ex parte communication with the parties if the court determines that will facilitate the
settlement of the case.
894. Domestic Violence. At the request of a party or on the court’s own motion, in
cases where there has been domestic violence between the parties, the court shall put
reasonable procedures in place to protect the victim from harm, harassment, or
intimidation.
5. Agreements. Any binding agreement that is reached by the parties shall comply
with Rule 69. As part of any agreement reached, the parties shall acknowledge that the
agreement was entered into by them voluntarily and without threat or undue influence
after full disclosure of all relevant facts and information, that it is intended to be a final
binding agreement pursuant to these rules, and that it is fair, equitable, and where there
are minor children common to the parties, is in the best interests of the children. The
judge, commissioner, or judge pro tempore conducting the settlement conference shall
make any findings necessary to approve the agreement pursuant to A.R.S. § 25-317 and
may sign any Decree of Dissolution presented that conforms to the agreements reached
by the parties. Any Decree of Dissolution signed by a judge pro tempore in accordance
with this rule shall have the same force and effect as a Decree signed by the judge or
commissioner to whom the case is assigned.
6. Failure to Appear. The parties and counsel, if any, shall be required to appear in
person at all settlement conferences scheduled. The court may impose sanctions as
permitted by Rule 71 for failing to appear and participate in the settlement conference.
7. Reports to the Court. If no or partial agreement is reached in the settlement
conference, the settlement conference judge or commissioner shall file a brief report
with the court stating that the parties met and attempted to resolve their differences, but
the settlement conference was unsuccessful. The report shall also state any agreements
reached and the issues remaining for resolution. The settlement conference judge shall
not report the positions of the parties and shall not comment upon or offer any opinion
about the position of any party. The settlement conference judge or commissioner may
also advise the court if the parties or the settlement conference judge or commissioner
believe that a further settlement conference would be helpful to resolving the remaining
issues.
E. Other Dispute Resolution Processes; Fees. The court may establish, approve, or
administer other dispute resolution processes designed to assist the parties in resolving disputes
without litigation through contested proceedings. Participants in an ADR service provided
through the court may be charged a fee in accordance with the law.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
It is the intention of these drafters to create rules that encourage the use of alternative
dispute resolution to resolve disputes in family law matters to the greatest extent possible. It is
believed that ADR will assist in the effective management of the caseloads of the family court
divisions and facilitate the resolution of family disputes. ADR services are usually less
expensive, less time consuming and less traumatic than litigation. This rule is intended to
establish a framework in which the parties are required to attend and voluntarily participate in
the ADR process. Through their participation it is hoped that a mutually satisfactory resolution
of the issues can be achieved. This rule is not intended to create, encourage, or result in ancillary
90court proceedings involving the motives, conduct or communications of the parties, unless
otherwise required by law.
Rule 68. Conciliation Court Services; Counseling, Mandatory Mediation, Assessment or
Evaluation and Other Services
A. Conciliation Counseling/Petition for Conciliation.
1. Filing a Petition for Conciliation. Either spouse may file a Petition for
Conciliation pursuant to A.R.S. § 25-381.09 for the purpose of preserving the marriage
or resolving controversies through counseling. The petition shall be filed with the clerk
of the court. When an action for dissolution, legal separation, or annulment is pending,
the original Petition for Conciliation may be filed in the court file or in a separate file
with a notice or minute entry of the filing of Petition for Conciliation filed in the court
file as provided by local rule or policy. A copy of the Petition for Conciliation will be
sent to conciliation court.
2. Period of Jurisdiction; Stay of Proceedings; Temporary Orders.
a. When the conciliation court accepts a Petition for Conciliation,
counseling shall be conducted and completed within sixty (60) days of the
filing of the petition. During this time, no action for dissolution, legal
separation, or annulment shall be filed and any pending action for dissolution,
legal separation, or annulment is stayed, unless the court lifts the stay before
the expiration of the sixty-day period.
b. There shall be no more than one (1) stay during any twelve-month
period in any case.
c. During the stay, the court may proceed to hear and enforce Petitions for
Orders of Protection pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3602 and any requests for
temporary orders as allowed by A.R.S. § 25-381.17.
3. Petition Accepted; Subsequent Services. Once a Petition for Conciliation has
been accepted by the conciliation court, individual or conjoint appointments will be
scheduled that each party must attend. The person who files the petition for conciliation
may withdraw the request with the approval of the conciliation court. Upon mutual
agreement of the parties, jurisdiction may be extended while attempting reconciliation.
Until the jurisdiction of the conciliation court has been terminated, the parties may not
participate in ADR or evaluation services offered through the conciliation court.
4. Outcome. The conciliation court shall notify the assigned judge or presiding
judge of the conciliation court when conciliation proceedings have been concluded and
that it is recommended that the jurisdiction of the conciliation court be terminated. In
addition, the judge shall be informed whether the petition was withdrawn, the petitioner
or respondent failed to appear for a conference, or if a formal written agreement was
reached and signed by both parties.
915. Confidentiality. All communications, both oral and written, shall be confidential
and shall not be disclosed without the consent of the party making such communication,
except as otherwise required by law.
B. Mediation/ADR. All family law cases that involve a controversy over child custody or
parenting time shall be subject to mediation or other alternative dispute resolution or process
provided for in local rules. Unless the parties agree to mediation by a private mediator, the court
or conciliation services shall determine whether mediation or ADR services are appropriate in a
particular case. The court or conciliation services may deem mediation inappropriate for reasons
such as parental unfitness, substance abuse, mental incapacity, domestic violence, or other good
cause. The mediator may not conduct any subsequent family assessment or evaluation in the
same case.
1. Commencement. If there is a disagreement between the parties concerning child
custody or parenting time, either or both parties may file a motion or request for
mediation or ADR services with the clerk of the court. The requesting party shall
provide a copy of the request to the assigned judge and the conciliation court. An order
for mediation or ADR services may also be made on the court’s own motion.
2. Domestic Violence.
a. In a proceeding concerning custody or parenting time of a child, if an
order of protection is in effect involving the parties or there is a finding by the
court of any conduct that would form the basis for an order of protection, the
court may order mediation or ADR services or refer the parties to mediation
only if there are policies and procedures in place that protect the victim from
harm, harassment, or intimidation.
b. Every party shall be notified in writing or orally in open court prior to
mediation or ADR services to request a waiver of mediation or to request that
reasonable procedures be in place at the mediation to protect a victim of
domestic violence as determined by the court or conciliation services. Neither
party shall be required to appear for mediation pending determination of this
matter.
c. Conciliation services shall reject for mediation or terminate mediation
in any case if the mediator deems mediation to be inappropriate because of
domestic violence.
3. Confidentiality. All communications, both oral and written, made by a party in
mediation shall be confidential and not divulged to third parties, in accordance with
Arizona statutes and court rules.
4. Mediation Conferences. When a matter has been ordered or referred to
mediation, an individual or conjoint conference or conferences will be scheduled by
Conciliation Services that each party must attend. The mediator shall be entitled to meet
with either or both parties in a confidential conference to determine the appropriateness
of mediation prior to commencement of the process. Counsel are not permitted to attend
92mediation conferences unless approved by the mediator or conciliation court policy.
The mediator may permit any person to attend a conference that the mediator, in his or
her sole discretion, believes is appropriate. Any person not a party to the action
attending mediation shall sign an agreement to be bound by the confidentiality
provisions of this rule.
5. Reports to the Court. At the conclusion of mediation by conciliation services, the
mediator shall file a report with the court setting forth any agreements, full or partial,
reached by the parties, and identifying the areas of disagreement, but shall not identify
the parties’ position regarding areas of disagreement. If no agreements are reached in
mediation, the mediator’s report to the court will advise the court only that the
mediation was unsuccessful in resolving the dispute.
6. Agreements, Signature of Counsel, Notice to Counsel, and Notice of Objection.
Any agreements reached as a result of mediation by conciliation services must be
placed in writing, following either procedure set forth below.
a. The agreement shall be signed by the parties and signed and approved
as to form by the attorneys, if any, and submitted to the court for approval no
later than thirty (30) days from the date of signing.
b. Alternatively, the agreement shall be signed by the parties, and
conciliation services shall submit a copy of the agreement to the parties’
attorneys, who shall have thirty (30) days from the date of signing to file a
Notice of Objection to the agreement, unless a different period is specified by
the court or in correspondence transmitting the agreement. If no timely
objection is filed, the agreement will be forwarded to the court with a proposed
order for the court’s consideration and signature. Any Notice of Objection to
the Agreement must be filed with the court, a copy provided to conciliation
services and the other party’s attorney or, if the party is not represented, to the
party. The Notice of Objection shall not state the reasons for the objections.
Such objections shall, however, be set forth in separate correspondence to the
party’s attorney, or if the party is not represented, to the party.
c. The court shall retain final authority to accept, modify or reject the
agreement. Upon the entry of a written order by the court approving or
modifying an agreement reached by the parties in mediation, it shall be
considered binding.
7. Failure to Appear. The parties are required to appear at all scheduled mediation
conferences. If one or both parties fail to appear, the mediator shall report to the court
the identity of each person who failed to appear and the court may impose sanctions, as
permitted by Rule 71(A).
C. Assessment or Evaluation.
1. Referral by the Court. The court may refer cases to conciliation services for
assessment or evaluation regarding child custody or parenting time when the court
93believes it would be in the children’s best interests.
2. Scheduling. Conciliation services shall notify the parties and counsel, if any, of
all scheduled appointments. Counsel is not permitted to attend the
assessment/evaluation unless it is deemed necessary by the evaluator for the success of
the process. Appointments scheduled by conciliation services will not be rescheduled
without good cause. All parties are required to appear at all scheduled assessment or
evaluation appointments. If one or both parties fail to appear, the evaluator will not
proceed but will report to the court the identity of each party who failed to appear and
the court may sanction any party who fails to appear for an appointment. In the event
the parties reach an agreement prior to the commencement of the assessment/evaluation,
the parties or counsel, if any, must immediately notify the court and conciliation
services of the agreement.
3. Conducting the Assessment or Evaluation. Conciliation services will conduct the
assessment/evaluation according to standard practices regarding the best interest of the
children and may conduct such interviews and review such materials as it deems
appropriate, including, but not limited to, interviewing the parents jointly or
individually, interviewing the children, and observing the parents and children in
interaction. If either party submits documents to the evaluator for review, the party
submitting the documents must promptly provide copies of all such documents to the
other party or counsel. Conciliation services’ assessment or evaluation files are
confidential and may only be released by order of the assigned judge or the family court
presiding judge.
4. Report to the Court. Upon completion of the assessment or evaluation, or upon
the parties reaching an agreement regarding the child custody and parenting time issues
in dispute, conciliation services will notify the court of completion of the assessment or
evaluation and will provide the court with a written report. All evaluative reports
generated by conciliation services shall be maintained as confidential but remain
available for appellate purposes. The parties or their counsel, if any, will be provided a
copy of the report. The report may include recommendations to the court regarding
child custody, parenting time or therapeutic interventions consistent with applicable law.
Upon direction from the court, an evaluator may provide an oral report in open court in
lieu of a written report.
5. Court Testimony. Conciliation services evaluators may appear in court
proceedings or depositions at the request of a party only when properly and timely
subpoenaed pursuant to these rules. Conciliation services evaluators may appear at
deposition only upon the approval of the judge. The judge shall set reasonable limits
with regard to the amount of time conciliation staff can be deposed, the nature of the
questions, the location of the deposition, and the release of conciliation services files
and records. The parties may stipulate before the evaluation or assessment is
commenced that the evaluators not be called as witnesses in any court proceeding or be
deposed, unless ordered by the court. If the parties enter into such a stipulation, this
subsection shall not apply.
94D. Family Education Services. The family court presiding judge or the presiding judge of
the superior court may implement family education services that parties must attend as deemed
appropriate.
E. Other Services; Fees. Conciliation services may approve, establish, or administer other
services designed to assist the parties or the court in resolving a dispute, including but not
limited, to open negotiation, parenting conferences, or early post decree conferences. Persons
participating in services provided by conciliation services may be charged a fee. The fee may be
deferred or waived pursuant to statute.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
The purpose of subdivision B(2) is to ensure that all counties have sufficient policies and
procedures to protect victims of domestic violence participating in mediation and ADR processes
through the court and conciliation services. These procedures and policies should include
screening cases for appropriateness for mediation where there has been domestic violence
between the parties and declining to conduct mediation where it is not appropriate. The
procedures to protect victims from harm, harassment, or intimidation should include procedures
to assist victims where there is a power disparity due to domestic violence. The court and
conciliation services should consider the request of any party that mediation be waived if there is
a history of domestic violence between the parties. Other examples of policies and procedures
that the court or conciliation services could offer include separate waiting areas, telephonic
mediation, shuttle mediation, or parties appearing on separate days for mediation. This list is not
intended to be viewed as mandatory or exhaustive.
Rule 69. Binding Agreements
Agreements between the parties shall be binding if they are in writing or if the agreements
are made or confirmed on the record before a judge, commissioner, judge pro tempore, court
reporter, or other person authorized by local rule or Administrative Order to accept such
agreements.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
Arizona Constitution, Article 6, § 30 designates the superior court as a court of record. A
proceeding or agreement is “on the record” if it is conducted or memorialized by a court reporter
in accordance with A.R.S. § 12-221, et seq., or if recorded by any recording device authorized by
law. A.R.S. § 38-424 currently authorizes the use of “tape recorders or other recording devices in
lieu of reporters or stenographers.” This rule also contemplates that the parties may reach
binding agreements at the time a deposition is conducted if both parties are present or
represented by counsel, and the agreement is recited on the record. This rule is adapted from
Rule 80(d), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 70. Settlement
A. Notice of Settlement. It shall be the duty of counsel, or any party not represented by
counsel, to give the judge or the commissioner assigned to the case or matter prompt notice of
the settlement of any case or matter set for trial, hearing, conference, or argument. In the event
95of any unreasonable delay between the settlement and the giving of such notice, the court may
impose sanctions against counsel or the parties to ensure future compliance with this rule.
B. Settlement Without Final Judgment. After a family law case has been set for trial or
evidentiary hearing, and the parties have advised the trial court that the matter has been settled
without presenting a final judgment, decree, or order to the court, the case or petition shall be
dismissed without further notice unless a final judgment, decree, or order is filed and entered of
record within forty-five (45) days from the notice to the court. In the alternative, the court may
require the parties to place their agreement on the record in accordance with Rule 69 at or before
the time set for trial or evidentiary hearing, or make such other orders as are reasonable under the
circumstances to ensure that a final judgment, decree, or order is entered.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
Paragraph A of this rule is based on Rule 5.1(c), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 71. Sanctions; Sealing
A. Sanctions. If a party or attorney fails to comply with these rules, upon motion of a party
or on the court's own initiative, the court shall, except upon a showing of good cause, make such
orders with regard to such conduct as are just, including, among others, an order refusing to
allow the disobedient party to support or oppose a designated claim or defense, prohibiting a
party from introducing designated matters in evidence, staying further proceedings until an order
entered by the court is obeyed, dismissing a claim, reassignment of the case to a deferred
position on the active calendar, assignment to the inactive calendar, finding of contempt of court,
or rendering a default judgment against the disobedient party. In lieu of or in addition to any
other sanction, the judge shall require the party, or the attorney representing the party, or both, to
pay the reasonable expenses incurred because of any noncompliance with this rule, including
attorneys' fees, or payment of an assessment to the clerk of the court, or both, unless the judge
finds that the noncompliance was substantially justified, or that other circumstances make an
award of expenses unjust.
B. Sealing the File. Upon request of any court appointed professional, the court may seal
any file or portion thereof that the court finds to contain any defamatory information about the
court appointed professional.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 16(f), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 72. Family Law Master
A. Appointment and Compensation. Upon stipulation and application by the parties, or on
the court’s own motion, the court may appoint a family law master who is an attorney or other
professional with education, experience, and special expertise regarding the particular issues to
be referred to the master. The compensation to be allowed to a master shall be fixed by the
court. The parties may stipulate to a particular family law master and the amount of
compensation, but the court must approve the family law master and compensation, and the court
96shall review the qualifications of the family law master prior to appointment. Compensation of
the family law master shall be allocated by the court and shall be treated as a taxable cost.
B. Powers. The order of reference appointing a family law master shall specify the
particular issues referred to the family law master and shall fix the time and place for beginning
and closing the hearings and for filing the master’s report. The master may deal with any issues
pursuant to Title 25, A.R.S., that could be presented to the assigned judge including post-decree
matters. Subject to any limitations in the order, the master shall exercise the power to regulate all
proceedings in every hearing before the master and to do all acts and take all measures necessary
or proper for the efficient performance of the master’s duties under the order. The master may
require the production of evidence upon all matters embraced in the reference. The master may
rule upon the admissibility of evidence, unless otherwise directed by the order of reference, and
has the authority to place witnesses under oath and may examine the parties and witnesses. When
a party requests, the master shall cause a record to be made of the evidence offered and excluded
in the same manner and subject to the same limitations as provided in Rule 104, Arizona Rules of
Evidence, for a court sitting without a jury. The cost of the record shall be paid by the parties as
allocated by the court and shall be a treated as a taxable cost.
C. Meetings. Upon receipt of an order of reference, the master shall set a time and place for
the first meeting of the parties or their attorneys, to be held within twenty (20) days after the date
of the order of reference, and shall notify the parties. It is the duty of the master to proceed with
all reasonable diligence. Unless stipulated otherwise, Rule 2(B) and these rules shall apply to all
proceedings before the master. If a party fails to appear at the time and place appointed, the
master may proceed ex parte or, in the master’s discretion adjourn the proceedings to a future
day, giving notice to the absent party of the adjournment.
D. Witnesses. The parties may procure the attendance of witnesses before the master by the
issuance and service of subpoenas as provided in Rule 52. If without adequate excuse a witness
fails to appear or give evidence, the witness may be punished as for contempt and be subjected to
the consequences, penalties, and remedies provided in Rules 65 and 52.
E. Report. The master shall prepare a report on the matters submitted to the master by the
order of reference that includes requested findings of fact and conclusions of law concerning the
disputed issues referred. Before filing the master’s report, a master may submit a draft thereof to
counsel for all parties for the purpose of receiving their suggestions. The master shall file the
final report with the clerk of the court. Unless otherwise ordered by the order of reference, the
master shall file with the clerk of the court any transcript of the proceedings prepared and with
the evidence and original exhibits presented. The master shall mail a copy of the report to the
parties on the same date the original report is filed with the clerk.
F. Objections. A party may object to the master’s report by filing with the court a motion to
modify or reject the master’s report, as prescribed in Rule 35, no later than fifteen (15) days from
the date of mailing of the master’s report. Each objection shall be stated with specificity and
shall reference the exhibits or portions of the record supporting the objection. Any response to
an objection shall be filed no later than ten (10) days from the date the objection is mailed. No
further pleadings shall be permitted without prior court order.
97G. Court Actions. If no objection is filed by either party pursuant to this rule, the master’s
report shall become an order of the court, unless the court on its own motion sets a hearing upon
a particular issue in the report within ten (10) days after the time for filing an objection has
passed. If the master’s report covers all issues in the case, and no objection is filed and the court
does not set a hearing, the court shall enter judgment on the master’s report. In the event any
objection(s) are filed, the court may set oral argument on the objection(s), adopt the report,
modify it, reject it in whole or in part or may receive further evidence. The court shall hold a
hearing or enter an order in connection with any objection to the master’s report within thirty
(30) days of the filing of the response or other ordered pleading to such objection.
H. Stipulation as to Findings. At the time the master is appointed, the parties may stipulate
that a master’s findings of fact shall be final. When so stipulated, the court shall consider only
questions of law arising from the master’s report. Absent such a stipulation, the court shall not
reverse the special master’s findings of fact unless clearly erroneous and shall review
conclusions of law de novo.
I. Sanctions. The court may impose sanctions upon any party or counsel for conduct
occurring before the master or in conjunction with the master’s proceedings or objections to the
master’s report that is done to harass, or to cause unnecessary delay, or needlessly increase the
cost of litigation. The master may also make recommendations for imposition of sanctions under
these rules, case law, or statute.
J. Immunity. The family law master has immunity in accordance with Arizona law as to all
acts undertaken pursuant to and consistent with the order of reference.
K. Applicability. No county is required to employ or utilize family law masters; however,
in the event a county elects to use family law masters, these rules shall apply.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 53, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure and is to be used for the
same purposes as Rule 53. Depending on the issues, the master could be an attorney or a person
with specialized knowledge on the issues referred to the family law master. A family law master
may also be appointed to hear a pre-decree/pre-judgment or post-decree case in the same manner
that a judge or arbitrator would hear a case, except that the trial court judge would have the final
decision after receiving the master’s report and ruling on any objections. Where the issues are
ongoing enforcement of custody or parenting time orders or related issues, a Parenting
Coordinator should be appointed instead of a family law master, pursuant to Rule 74.
Rule 73. Family Law Conference Officer
A. Definitions.
1. Conference. An alternative dispute resolution proceeding conducted by a
conference officer to obtain information or agreements related to support (including
spousal maintenance), custody and parenting time, property and debt issues and,
ultimately, to assist the parties to memorialize any agreements, and make
recommendations to the court regarding contested issues.
982. Interim Order or Judgment. An order issued by a judge or commissioner after
reviewing the conference officer's report and recommendations. The parties have
twenty-five (25) days from the date the order is filed by the clerk of the superior court
to review and object to the interim order before it becomes a final judgment or order.
3. IV-D Case. A case brought by a IV-D agency or a IV-D participant to establish
paternity, to establish, enforce, or modify support, or to enforce spousal support, where
appropriate.
4. Non-IV-D Case. A case that is not brought by a IV-D agency or a IV-D
participant to establish paternity, to establish, enforce, or modify support, or to enforce
spousal support. These cases are also referred to as "private cases."
5. Obligor. A person ordered, by a court or administrative order, to make support
payments.
6. Paternity. Determination of the father of a child or children born out of wedlock.
7. Parenting Time. Determination of the time children spend with each parent (or
others ordered to have custody or control of a child or children under Arizona law)
according to the best interests of the child(ren). This is also known as "visitation."
8. Support. The provision of maintenance or subsistence, including medical
insurance coverage and uncovered medical costs for the child, arrears, interest on
arrears, past support, interest on past support, and reimbursement for expended public
assistance. For purposes of this rule, support may also include spousal maintenance.
9. Property. Determination of the separate and community interest of all parties in
all real and personal property, and an appropriate affirmation or division of all property
interests of the parties.
10. Debt. Determination of all separate and community debts and obligations of the
parties, and an appropriate division and allocation of responsibility for all such debts
and obligations.
B. Appointment. The presiding judge or his/her designee may appoint a conference officer
to hold a conference and make recommendations and obtain agreements for disposition in both
IV-D and private cases (non-IV-D) to establish, enforce, or modify support, or to enforce
custody or parenting time (visitation), to affirm or divide property, and to determine and allocate
responsibility for all debts. The conference officer is neutral and does not represent or advocate
for either party. Except as provided in this rule, written qualifications for the position of
conference officer, which at a minimum shall require a bachelor’s degree and shall include an
obligation to abide by the Code of Judicial Conduct, shall be established and on file with the
administration office of the superior court. The conference officer shall also be required to attend
forty (40) hours of basic mediation training within six (6) months of his or her hire date.
C. Powers and Duties.
1. Establishment, enforcement or modification of support. When establishment,
99enforcement or modification of support is at issue, the conference officer shall submit a
written agreement signed by all parties or a report and recommendation that includes, as
appropriate, any or all of the following: the agreements between the parties,
recommendations concerning arrears or modification, assessments of circumstances
concerning payment of present support.
2. Enforcement of custody or parenting time (visitation). When enforcement of
custody or parenting time (visitation) are at issue, the conference officer may submit a
written agreement signed by all parties or recommend any or all of the following:
setting the case for evidentiary hearing; entering an order based on agreement of the
parties; ordering specific relief; scheduling the case for a review hearing; referring the
matter to case supervision, which may include counseling, substance abuse test
monitoring, supervised parenting time or supervised exchange of the child(ren), or other
appropriate programs; appointing a volunteer who is approved by all parties to
supervise parenting time; referring the matter to a local social service agency to exercise
continuing supervision of custody or parenting time terms, pending an evidentiary
hearing; or ordering any other relief as appropriate (i.e. parent/child alienation
education).
3. Voluntary paternity. When the parties agree regarding paternity, the conference
officer shall prepare an agreement or acknowledgement of paternity and, where
appropriate, an order of paternity and submit the documents to a proper official
authorized by law to sign or enter the order of paternity.
4. Division of Property and Debt. When the parties agree on the designation or
division of property interests as sole and separate or community property, or agree on
the appropriate designation and allocation of separate or community debts, the
conference officer may submit to an appropriate judicial officer a written agreement
signed by all parties and an appropriate decree, judgment or order signed by all parties
setting forth the parties’ agreements.
D. Procedures.
1. Conduct of Conference. The conference officer may swear in or administer an
oath to the parties and thereafter conduct the proceedings in an informal manner, giving
all parties a full opportunity to present their positions. The conference officer may
record the proceedings by audiotape or court reporter. If a party is represented by an
attorney, the attorney may be present at the conference.
2. Witnesses. If there is a request to present witnesses at a conference where a
recommendation may be made to the court, the conference officer will either allow the
witnesses to testify or refer the matter to the assigned judge or commissioner for a
hearing.
3. Exhibits. Documents presented at a conference where a recommendation may be
made to the court will be reviewed by the conference officer and placed in the court’s
nonpublic working file and maintained in the file until the time frame of the objection
period has expired. These documents will not be marked as exhibits and will not be part
100of the court's file. In the event of an objection, the documents will be provided to the
court upon request.
4. Stipulation and Order. If the parties are in agreement on issues raised during the
conference, the conference officer shall complete a stipulation, consent decree, consent
judgment, written agreement, or order for signature by the parties or their attorneys. The
conference officer shall forward the original signed documents and copies, as
appropriate, to the judge or commissioner for signature.
5. Recommendation of Conference Officer. If the parties are unable to reach a full
agreement on all issues, the conference officer may assist the parties in preparation of
partial agreement and, if appropriate, recommend a disposition to the assigned judge or
commissioner, continue the conference for good cause, or decline to proceed due to
complexity of legal or factual issues and refer the matter to the assigned judge or
commissioner for further action. The conference officer may also recommend that the
judge or commissioner hold a trial or an evidentiary hearing, and, if authorized by a
judge or commissioner, proceed to schedule and notify the parties of the trial date or
evidentiary hearing date. The conference officer shall advise the parties of their right to
object to any the conference officer's recommendations and to have a hearing upon
request before a judge or commissioner concerning an objection.
6. Decision by judge or commissioner. The judge or commissioner, upon receipt of
an agreement, consent decree, judgment or order, or a report and recommendation of a
conference officer, may make determinations as to law and as to the findings of fact as
follows:
a. enter an order of paternity, consent decree, consent judgment, or order
approving agreements of the parties, as appropriate;
b. approve the recommendation and adopt it as an interim order of the
court, subject to either party objecting or requesting a hearing within twenty-
five (25) days from the date the order is filed by the clerk of the superior court;
c. modify the recommendation and adopt the modified recommendation as
an interim order of the court, subject to either party objecting or requesting a
hearing within twenty-five (25) days from the date the order is filed by the
clerk of the superior court;
d. reject the recommendation in whole or in part and affirm the current
order, subject to either party objecting or requesting a hearing within twenty-
five (25) days from the date the order is filed by the clerk of the superior court;
or
e. set a de novo hearing, a trial, or an evidentiary hearing on the assigned
judge's or commissioner's calendar.
7. Objection to Interim Order or Affirmation of Existing Order. An objection to a
recommendation of a conference officer shall be filed no later than twenty-five (25)
days from the date the order is filed by the clerk of the superior court. A party who
101objects shall clearly state in writing the objection to the recommendation, the basis for
the objection, a proposed solution, and whether a hearing is requested. The party shall
file the original objection with the clerk of the superior court and timely provide copies
to the other party or parties to the action, to the assigned judge or commissioner, to the
conference officer, and in IV-D cases, to the Attorney General's office. The judge or
commissioner shall review the objection and shall set a hearing if requested. If no
hearing is requested, the judge or commissioner may rule on the objection without
further hearing.
8. Sanctions and defaults. The court may assess sanctions against a party who
objects to a recommendation or requests a hearing if the judge or commissioner finds
that the objection(s) or request was made without reasonable belief in the merit of the
grounds for the objection(s) or request, for the purpose of delay, or without other good
cause. If the person upon whom an Order to Appear is served does not appear at the
scheduled hearing or conference, a civil arrest warrant or a child support arrest warrant,
as appropriate, may be issued, or a default judgment may be entered.
9. Appeal time frame. The appeal time frame begins when the interim order
becomes a final, appealable order after the objection period if there has been no
objection; or, if there has been an objection, following the court's ruling on the objection
when a final, appealable order has been issued.
10. Exceptions. A conference officer may not conduct proceedings for which a
hearing is required by statute, including denial of parenting time, license suspension,
UCCJEA, or custody establishment or modifications, unless the hearing is waived.
E. Failure to Comply With Order to Bring Information.
1. Support enforcement proceedings. If a person does not provide information at
the conference as ordered, the conference officer may:
a. if the obligor is the party who failed to comply by providing the
requested information, make a recommendation to the court to hold the obligor
in contempt until the obligor either produces the information or carries the
burden of convincing the court that production of the information is not within
the obligor's power;
b. proceed with the conference and make a recommendation to the court
based upon the information presented at the conference; or,
c. make a recommendation to the court to impose such other sanctions as
the court deems appropriate under the circumstances.
2. Support modification proceedings. If either party does not comply with an order
to provide the information at the conference, the conference officer may:
a. proceed with the conference and make a recommendation to the court
based upon the information presented at the conference; or
102b. make a recommendation to the court to impose such sanctions as the
court deems appropriate under the circumstances.
F. Immunity. A conference officer has immunity in accordance with Arizona law as to all
acts undertaken pursuant to and consistent with this rule and orders of the court.
G. Applicability. No county is required to employ or utilize family law conference officers;
however, in the event a county elects to use family law conference officers, these rules shall
apply.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on former Rule 53(k), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, an experimental
rule that was abrogated simultaneously with the effective date of these rules.
Rule 74. Parenting Coordinator
A. Determination of Need for Parenting Coordinator and Appointment. Prior to,
simultaneously with, or after entry of a decree, judgment, or custody or parenting time order, at
the request of either party or on the court’s own motion, the court may appoint a Parenting
Coordinator in any proceeding under Title 25, A.R.S., involving children if it finds any of the
following:
1. the parents are persistently in conflict with one another;
2. there is a history of substance abuse by either parent or family violence;
3. there are serious concerns about the mental health or behavior of either parent;
4. a child has special needs; or
5. it would otherwise be in the children's best interests to do so.
Parents may agree to use a Parenting Coordinator and agree to a specific person, subject to
approval by the court, or the court may make the choice of the person to serve as the Parenting
Coordinator.
B. Persons Who May Serve as Parenting Coordinators. A Parenting Coordinator may be
an attorney who is licensed to practice law in Arizona; a psychiatrist who is licensed to practice
medicine or osteopathy in Arizona; a psychologist who is licensed to practice psychology in
Arizona; a person who is licensed by the Arizona Board of Behavioral Health Examiners as a
social worker, professional counselor, marriage and family therapist, or substance abuse
counselor; any other Arizona licensed or certified professional with education, experience, and
special expertise regarding the particular issues referred; or professional staff of conciliation
services. The court may prescribe additional requirements for service as Parenting Coordinator.
C. Term of Service. The term of the Parenting Coordinator will be designated in the Order
of Appointment. The Parenting Coordinator may resign upon notice to the parties and order of
the court. Absent an order of the court, one or both parties cannot discharge the Parenting
103Coordinator. Complaints about the Parenting Coordinator shall be addressed in the manner
specified in the Order of Appointment. If such complaints remain unresolved after following the
procedures specified in the order, a motion may be filed with the court requesting removal of the
Parenting Coordinator. The court may terminate the service of the Parenting Coordinator at any
time upon finding that there is no longer a need for the assistance of the Parenting Coordinator.
D. Fees. The court will determine the fees for the services of a Parenting Coordinator and
the allocation of fees between the parties. The court may order that the parents pay the Parenting
Coordinator a retainer before the Parenting Coordinator begins work with a family. If permitted
by the Order of Appointment, the Parenting Coordinator may recommend to the court an
adjustment in the division of payment under special circumstances.
E. Powers and Scope of Appointment. The court order appointing the Parenting
Coordinator shall specify the scope of the appointment. The scope may include assisting with
implementation of court orders, making recommendations to the court regarding implementation,
clarification, modification, and enforcement of any temporary or permanent custody or parenting
time order, and making recommendations on the day-to-day issues experienced by the parties.
By way of example only, these issues include disagreements around exchanges, holiday
scheduling, discipline, health issues, school and extracurricular activities, and managing
problematic behaviors by the parents or child(ren). The Parenting Coordinator shall not have the
authority to make a recommendation affecting child support, a change of custody, or a
substantial change in parenting time. In the event the Parenting Coordinator determines parenting
or family issues or circumstances exist that are significantly detrimental to the welfare of the
child(ren) and that a change in custody or a substantial change in parenting time is warranted, the
Parenting Coordinator may submit the Parenting Coordinator’s concerns in writing to the parties
and the court.
F. Additional Authority of Parenting Coordinator. The Parenting Coordinator may
interview all members of the immediate and extended family or household of both parties and
the children. To the extent provided in the Order of Appointment, the Parenting Coordinator may
interview and request information from any persons who the Parenting Coordinator deems to
have relevant information, including doctors, therapists, schools, or other caretakers. The
Parenting Coordinator may recommend that the court order the parties or children to participate
in ancillary services, to be provided by the court or third parties, including but not limited to
physical or psychological examinations or assessments, counseling, and alcohol or drug
monitoring and testing. The court shall allocate between the parties the cost of any ancillary
services ordered.
G. Time Sensitive Issue Authority and Procedure. When a short-term, emerging, and
time sensitive situation or dispute within the scope of authority of the Parenting Coordinator
arises that requires an immediate decision for the welfare of the children and parties, a Parenting
Coordinator may make a binding temporary decision. This interim decision shall be made
without prejudice and shall not be regarded as precedent as to any future action or procedure for
any other dispute. The decision shall be submitted to the assigned judge with a copy to the
parties (or counsel, if represented) in a written report that shall document all substantive issues
addressed and the basis for the decision for review and entry of any appropriate orders at the
judge’s earliest opportunity. Thereafter, the procedures set forth in paragraph H shall apply.
104H. Report. Recommendations by the Parenting Coordinator must be made or confirmed in a
written report to the court and parties in substantially the same format as Rule 97, Form 9, which
shall be submitted no later than five (5) days after an oral determination or receipt of all
information necessary to make a recommendation. A copy of the report will be mailed or
transmitted to the parties or their counsel on the date of submission. The report may be
transmitted by fax or email to the parties at a fax number or email address provided by the parties
to the Parenting Coordinator.
I. Objection. A party who objects shall clearly state in writing the objection to the
recommendation, the basis for the objection, a proposed solution, and whether a hearing is
requested. The judicial officer shall set a hearing if requested. If no hearing is requested, the
judicial officer may rule on the objection without further hearing. By agreement of the parties or
order of the court, the recommendations of the Parenting Coordinator will remain in effect
during this objection period and process unless and until it is affected by a further order of the
court.
J. Court Action. The court, upon receipt of a report and recommendation from a Parenting
Coordinator, may: (1) approve the recommendation and adopt it as an interim order of the court,
subject to either party objecting or requesting a hearing within ten (10) days from the date the
report and recommendation is submitted to the court; (2) modify the recommendation and adopt
the modified recommendation as an interim order of the court, subject to either party objecting or
requesting a hearing within ten (10) days from the date the report and recommendation is
submitted to the court; (3) reject the recommendation report in whole or in part and affirm the
current order, subject to either party objecting or requesting a hearing within ten (10) days from
the date the report and recommendation is submitted to the court; or (4) set a hearing on the
assigned judicial officer’s calendar. The court may use an order substantially similar to Rule 97,
Form 10.
K. Immunity. The Parenting Coordinator has immunity in accordance with Arizona law as
to all acts undertaken pursuant to and consistent with the appointment order of the court.
L. Applicability. No county is required to employ or utilize Parenting Coordinators;
however, in the event a county elects to use Parenting Coordinators, these rules shall apply.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Maricopa County Local Rule 6.12, Pima County Local Rule 8.11 and
Coconino Local Rule 20. The term “Parenting Coordinator” replaces the terms “special master”
and “family court advisor” previously used in Arizona based on a national trend. Further, the
Association of Family and Conciliation Courts (AFCC) has promulgated guidelines for the
appointment of Parenting Coordinators. The appointment of a Parenting Coordinator is
appropriate when parents have ongoing conflicts related to enforcement of custody and parenting
time orders, which without a Parenting Coordinator would result in protracted litigation. The
appointment of such persons to assist the court is authorized pursuant to A.R.S. § 25-405, and
shall also comply with the requirements of A.R.S. § 25-406. Parenting Coordinators are used
throughout the country to assist in the effective resolution of the ongoing conflicts surrounding
custody and parenting time issues. This rule is not intended to transfer the authority and
105jurisdiction of the superior court to make custody decisions or substantially modify parenting
time.
For purposes of example only, and not by limitation, short-term, emerging, and time-
sensitive situations governed by paragraph G might be: 1) temporarily changing exchange day,
time, or place due to an immediate need; 2) attendance at or participation in an unexpected
special event or occasion by the child or a parent; 3) responsibility for care of a sick child or
accompaniment to medical treatment; or 4) another unpredictable and significant need of the
child or a parent.
Additional parent information regarding the use of Parenting Coordinators may be found in
Rule 97, Form 11.
Rule 75. Plan for Expedited Process
Any county which has a plan for expedited process pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 25-326 and 25-
412, shall set forth that county’s plan in a local rule.
106IX. PRETRIAL AND TRIAL PROCEDURES
Rule 76. Pretrial Procedures
A. Resolution Management Conference (RMC); Preparation and Matters to Be
Discussed.
1. Except as otherwise provided in Rule 47(H) and upon written request of any
party, the court shall, or upon its own motion the court may, schedule one or more
Resolution Management Conferences that shall be held within sixty (60) days of receipt
of written request by the court, unless extended for good cause shown.
2. Within the time set by the court in the particular case, or if no time is set then not
less than five (5) judicial days prior to the date of the Resolution Management
Conference, each party shall:
a. personally meet and confer with the opposing party or parties and their
counsel to resolve as many issues as possible (if there is a current court order
prohibiting contact of the parties or a significant history of domestic violence
between the parties, the parties shall not be required to personally meet or
contact each other in violation of the court order, but the parties and their
counsel shall take all steps reasonable under the circumstances to resolve as
many issues as possible);
b.comply with all applicable disclosure requirements set forth in Rule 49
or 50; and
c. prepare and file a written Resolution Statement setting forth any
agreements and a specific and detailed position the party proposes to resolve
all disputed issues in the case, without argument in support of the position.
The Resolution Statement shall be submitted in a form that substantially
complies with Rule 97, Form 4 or 5. If child support is an issue in the case, the
statement shall include a completed Child Support Worksheet prepared in
accordance with the Arizona Child Support Guidelines.
3. At any Resolution Management Conference under this rule, the court may:
a. enter binding agreements on the record in accordance with Rule 69;
b. determine the positions of the parties on the disputed issues and explore
reasonable solutions with the parties to facilitate settlement of the issues;
c. enter temporary orders as agreed upon by the parties (on agreement of
the parties, the court may also enter temporary orders based upon the
discussions, avowals, and arguments presented by the parties without an
evidentiary hearing on the contested issues);
107d. order evaluations, assessments, appraisals, testing, appointments, or
other special procedures needed to properly manage the case and resolve the
disputed issues;
e. schedule a trial date or evidentiary hearing, and any other necessary
hearings or conferences;
f. resolve any discovery and disclosure schedules and disputes;
g. eliminate non-meritorious claims or defenses;
h. permit the amendment of pleadings;
i. assist in identifying those issues of fact and law that are still at issue;
j. refer a matter for settlement conference;
k. order other ADR processes;
l. set a date for filing the joint pretrial statement required by paragraph D
of this rule;
m. impose time limits on trial proceedings or portions thereof, and issue
orders regarding management of documents, exhibits, and testimony; and
n. make such other orders as the court deems appropriate.
B. Pretrial Orders. After any conference held pursuant to this rule, an order shall be
entered reciting the action taken. This order shall control the subsequent course of the action
unless modified by a subsequent order. The order following a final pretrial conference shall be
modified only to prevent manifest injustice.
C. Pretrial Statement, Inventory of Property, and Financial Affidavits; Preparation;
Final Pretrial Conference.
1. Except in the case where there is domestic violence between unrepresented
parties, the parties shall file a joint pretrial statement. If there has been domestic
violence between unrepresented parties, the parties may file separate pretrial statements.
Upon the initiative of the petitioner or counsel for the petitioner, the parties or counsel,
if the parties are represented, shall confer and prepare a written pretrial statement,
signed by each party or counsel, to be filed by the petitioner no later than twenty (20)
days prior to trial, unless another time is set by the court. Such pretrial statement shall
contain the following:
a. the nature of the action;
b. names and addresses, if not confidential, of the parties;
c. names and dates of birth of all minor children;
108d. the length of the trial if different from that scheduled by the court;
e. a list of the names, addresses, and phone numbers of witnesses intended
to be used by each party during the trial, including an indication of witnesses
whose testimony will be received by deposition testimony only (no witness
shall be used at the trial other than those listed, except for good cause shown);
f. a list of the exhibits that each party intends to use at trial, specifying
exhibits that the parties agree are admissible at trial, or if not in agreement, a
list of the objections and the specific grounds for each objection that a party
will make if the exhibit is offered at trial (specific objections or grounds not
listed in the pretrial statement may be deemed waived at the discretion of the
trial judge);
g. stipulations or agreements of the parties;
h. a statement of uncontested facts;
i. statements of contested issues of fact and law by each party;
j. a statement by each party that all pretrial discovery and disclosure has
been completed by the trial date and that the parties have exchanged all
exhibits and reports of expert witnesses who have been listed as witnesses; and
k. a statement as to whether the parties have in good faith discussed
settlement, and if not, the reasons for not discussing settlement.
2. The parties shall each file with the joint or separate pretrial statement(s) the
following:
a. an Affidavit of Financial Information on a form approved by the court;
and
b. if the case involves an action for dissolution, legal separation or
annulment, a detailed itemized inventory of property and debt, listing the
community, joint tenancy, and other property and debts held in common by the
parties, and the separate property and debts of each party. This inventory shall
set forth the date the property was acquired, by what title the parties hold the
property, the amount of encumbrance thereon, and each party's evaluation of
the fair market value of the property. The inventory shall also set forth the
party’s proposed distribution of property and debts. The Inventory shall be in
accordance with Rule 97, Form 12, “Inventory of Property and Debts.”
3. No other exhibits or witnesses shall be offered or presented during the trial other
than those listed and exchanged, except when otherwise permitted by the court in the
interest of justice and for good cause shown.
4. If there has been a failure by either or both counsel, or the parties if not
represented by counsel, to meet and prepare the pre-trial statement, the court may
109impose any of the sanctions or penalties provided by these rules or any statute or
authority of the court, or on request of a party, and in the absence of good cause shown,
the court may continue the trial, enter an interim award for relief to the requesting party
based on his or her Financial Affidavit, and award the requesting party his or her
attorneys’ fees and expenses incurred in preparing for and attending the pretrial hearing,
trial or settlement conference scheduled by the court.
5. In its discretion, the court may schedule a final pretrial conference prior to trial at
which the trial judge shall review the pretrial statement and ascertain whether the
parties have complied with the requirements of this rule. The participants at any such
conference shall formulate a plan for trial, including a program for facilitating the
admission of evidence. The conference shall be attended by at least one of the attorneys
who will conduct the trial for each of the parties and by any unrepresented parties.
D. Sanctions. If a party or attorney fails to obey a scheduling or pretrial order, or any
provision of this rule, or if no appearance is made on behalf of a party at a Resolution
Management Conference, a pretrial conference, an evidentiary hearing, a trial or other scheduled
hearing, or if a party or party’s attorney is substantially unprepared to participate in the
conference, or if a party or party’s attorney fails to participate in good faith in a conference,
hearing, or trial, or in the preparation of a resolution statement or joint pretrial statement, the
judge, upon motion or the judge’s own initiative, shall, except upon a showing of good cause,
make such orders with regard to such conduct as are just, including, among others:
1. an order refusing to allow the disobedient party to support or oppose designated
claims or defenses or prohibiting that party from introducing designated matters in
evidence;
2. an order striking out pleadings or parts thereof, or staying further proceedings
until the order is obeyed, or dismissing the action or proceeding or any party thereof, or
rendering a judgment or temporary order;
3. in lieu of any of the foregoing orders or in addition thereto, an order treating as a
contempt of court the failure to obey any orders, except an order to submit to a physical
or mental examination.
In lieu of or in addition to any other sanction, the court shall require the party, or the attorney
representing the party, or both, to pay the reasonable expenses incurred because of any
noncompliance with this rule, including attorneys’ fees or an assessment to the clerk of the court,
or both, unless the court finds that the noncompliance was substantially justified, or that other
circumstances make an award of expenses unjust.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rules 7.1 and 16, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, with additions
added to fit the family law context.
110Rule 77. Trial Procedures
A. Setting of Cases for Trial. In every family law case, unless a trial has been set at a
Resolution Management Conference or on the court’s own motion, any party may file a Motion
to Set requesting that the case be set for trial. The motion shall state:
1. that the case will be ready for trial on or after [insert date];
2.that the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the parties or their individual
attorneys who are responsible for the conduct of the litigation are: [insert the
appropriate information];
3. the estimated time for trial; and
4. whether the case is entitled to a preference for trial because custody is at issue.
B. Conduct in Trial. Trials shall be conducted in an orderly, courteous, and dignified
manner. Arguments and remarks shall be addressed to the court, except that by permission of the
court, counsel may make proper inquiries or ask questions of opposing counsel.
C. Trial Continuances and Scheduling Conflicts.
1. Trial Continuance. When an action has been set for trial on a specified date by
order of the court, no continuance of the trial shall be granted except upon written
motion setting forth sufficient grounds and good cause. Stipulations for continuances
shall be regarded as joint motions to continue and must set forth grounds or good cause
for the request. No trial setting shall be vacated or continued except by formal order of
the court.
2. Motion to Continue; Unavailability of Witness or Party. On a Motion to
Continue a Trial, if the ground for the continuance is the unavailability of a party or
witness, the party requesting the continuance shall state in the motion:
a. why the testimony of such witness is material to the proceedings;
b. that the party has used due diligence to obtain such testimony;
c. when the party learned of the witness’ or the party’s unavailability; and
d. that the postponement is not sought only for delay, but is based on good
cause.
3. Scheduling Conflicts between Courts.
a. Notice to the Court. Upon learning of a scheduling conflict between a
case in superior court and a case in United States District Court, or between
cases in the superior courts of different counties, or between cases in different
courts within a county, or between divisions of the same court, counsel has a
111duty to promptly notify the judges and other counsel involved in order that the
conflict may be resolved.
b. Resolution of Conflicts. Upon being advised of a scheduling conflict,
the judges involved shall, if necessary, confer personally or by telephone in an
effort to resolve the conflict. While neither federal nor state court cases have
priority in scheduling, the following factors may be considered in resolving the
conflict:
1) the nature of the cases as civil or criminal, and the presence of any
speedy trial problems;
2) the length, urgency, or relative importance of the matters;
3) whether the case involves out-of-town witnesses, parties, or
counsel;
4) the age of the cases;
5) the matter that was set first;
6) any priority granted by rule or statute; and
7) any other pertinent factor.
4. Inter-Division Conflicts. Conflicts in scheduling between divisions of the same
court may be governed by local rule or general order.
5. Time Limitation. The court may impose reasonable time limits on the trial
proceedings or portions thereof.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
Paragraph B is based on Rule 80(a), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. Subdivision C(5) is
based on Rule 16(h), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
112X. JUDGMENTS AND DECREES
Rule 78. Judgments; Costs; Attorneys’ Fees
A. Definition; Form. “Judgment” as used in these rules includes a decree and an order from
which an appeal lies. A judgment shall not contain a recital of pleadings or the record of prior
proceedings, but may contain findings by a family law master appointed by the court.
B. Judgment upon Multiple Claims or Involving Multiple Parties. When more than one
claim for relief is presented in an action, whether as a claim, counterclaim, or third-party claim,
or when multiple parties are involved, the court may direct the entry of final judgment as to one
or more but fewer than all of the claims or parties only upon an express determination that there
is no just reason for delay and upon an express direction for the entry of judgment. In the
absence of such determination and direction, any order or other form of decision, however
designated, that adjudicates fewer than all the claims or the rights and liabilities of fewer than all
the parties shall not terminate the action as to any of the claims or parties, and the order or other
form of decision is subject to revision at any time before the entry of judgment adjudicating all
the claims and the rights and liabilities of all the parties. For purposes of this subsection, a claim
for attorneys’ fees may be considered a separate claim from the related judgment regarding the
merits of a cause.
C. Entry of Judgment after Death of Party. Judgment may be entered after the death of a
party upon a decision or upon an issue of fact rendered in the party’s lifetime, except that an
order dissolving the marriage may not be entered after the death of either party.
D. Attorneys’ Fees, Costs, and Expenses.
1. Claims for Attorneys’ Fees, Costs, and Expenses. A claim for attorneys’ fees, costs
and expenses initially shall be made in the pleadings, pretrial statement, or by motion filed
prior to trial or post-decree evidentiary hearing. Costs and expenses also shall be claimed by
an itemized statement.
2. Time of Determination. Except as to temporary awards of attorneys’ fees and costs,
when attorneys’ fees are claimed, the determination as to the claimed attorneys’ fees shall be
included with a decision on the merits of the case or as otherwise ordered by the court
3. Method of Establishing Claim. A claim for attorneys’ fees, costs, and expenses shall
be supported by an itemized affidavit, exhibits, or, at the discretion of the court, by
testimony. If the motion is contested, opposing parties may respond to the motion and a
hearing may be granted in the discretion of the court. In addition, the court may refer issues
relating to the value of services to a special master under Rule 72.
4. Scope. The provisions of subdivisions (1) through (3) do not apply to claims for fees,
costs, and expenses as sanctions pursuant to statute or rule, or to causes in which the
substantive law governing the action provides for the recovery of such fees, costs, and
expenses as an element of damages to be proved at trial.
113COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 54, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 79. Summary Judgment
A. For Claimant. A party seeking to recover upon a claim, counterclaim, or to obtain a
declaratory judgment may move for a summary judgment in the party's favor upon all or any part
thereof. Said motion may be made with or without supporting affidavits at any time after the
expiration of twenty (20) days from the service of process upon the adverse party, but no sooner
than the date on which the answer is due, or after service of a motion for summary judgment by
the adverse party.
B. For Defending Party. A party against whom a claim or counterclaim is asserted or a
declaratory judgment is sought may move for a summary judgment in the party's favor as to all
or any part thereof. Such motion may be made with or without supporting affidavits.
C. Motion and Proceedings Thereon.
1. Upon timely request by any party, the court shall set a time for hearing of the
motion. If no request is made, the court may, in its discretion, set a time for such
hearing. A party opposing the motion must file affidavits, memoranda, or both within
fifteen (15) days after service of the motion. The moving party shall have five (5) days
thereafter in which to serve reply memoranda and affidavits. The foregoing time periods
may be shortened or enlarged by the court or by agreement of the parties. The judgment
sought shall be rendered forthwith if the pleadings, deposition, answers to
interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that
there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a
judgment as a matter of law.
2. Any party filing a motion for summary judgment shall set forth, separately from
the memorandum of law, the specific facts relied upon in support of the motion. The
facts shall be stated in concise, numbered paragraphs. As to each fact, the statement
shall refer to the specific portion of the record where the fact may be found. Any party
opposing a motion for summary judgment shall file a statement in the form prescribed
by this rule, specifying those paragraphs in the moving party's statement of facts which
are disputed, and also setting forth those facts which establish a genuine issue of
material fact or otherwise preclude summary judgment in favor of the moving party. In
the alternative, the movant and the party opposing the motion shall file a joint statement
in the form prescribed by this rule, setting forth those material facts as to which there is
no genuine dispute. The joint statement may provide that any stipulation of fact is not
intended to be binding for any purpose other than the motion for summary judgment.
D. Case Not Fully Adjudicated on Motion. If, on motion under this rule, judgment is not
rendered upon the whole case or for all the relief asked and a trial is necessary, the court at the
hearing of the motion, by examining the pleadings and the evidence before it and by
interrogating counsel, shall if practicable ascertain what material facts exist without substantial
114controversy and what material facts are actually and in good faith controverted. It shall
thereupon make an order specifying the facts that appear without substantial controversy,
including the extent to which the amount of damages or other relief is not in controversy, and
directing such further proceedings in the action as are just. Upon the trial of the action, the facts
so specified shall be deemed established, and the trial shall be conducted accordingly.
E. Form of Affidavits; Further Testimony; Defense Required. Supporting and opposing
affidavits shall be made on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would be admissible
in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the affiant is competent to testify to the matters
stated therein. Sworn or certified copies of all papers or parts thereof referred to in an affidavit
shall be attached thereto or served therewith. The court may permit affidavits to be supplemented
or opposed by depositions, answers to interrogatories, or further affidavits. When a motion for
summary judgment is made and supported as provided in this rule, an adverse party may not rest
upon the mere allegations or denials of the adverse party's pleading, but the adverse party's
response, by affidavits or as otherwise provided in this rule, must set forth specific facts showing
that there is a genuine issue for trial. If the adverse party does not so respond, summary
judgment, if appropriate, shall be entered against the adverse party.
F. When Affidavits Are Unavailable. Should it appear from the affidavits of a party
opposing the motion that the party cannot for reasons stated present by affidavit facts essential to
justify the party's opposition, the court may refuse the application for judgment or may order a
continuance to permit affidavits to be obtained or depositions to be taken or discovery to be had
or may make such other order as is just.
G. Affidavits Made In Bad Faith. Should it appear to the satisfaction of the court at any
time that any of the affidavits presented pursuant to this rule are presented in bad faith or solely
for the purpose of delay, the court shall forthwith order the party employing them to pay to the
other party the amount of the reasonable expenses which the filing of the affidavits caused the
other party to incur, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, and any offending party or attorney
may be adjudged guilty of contempt.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 56, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 80. Declaratory Judgments
The procedure for obtaining a declaratory judgment shall be in accordance with these rules.
The existence of another adequate remedy does not preclude a judgment for declaratory relief in
cases where it is appropriate. The court may order a speedy hearing of an action for a declaratory
judgment and may advance it on the calendar.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 57, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
115Rule 81. Entry of Judgment
A. Preparation and Signing of Judgments and Other Orders. Forms of judgment shall
be served upon all parties and counsel. Except as provided in Rule 78(E), a party seeking
attorneys' fees shall provide in the form of judgment for an award of attorneys' fees in an amount
to be entered by the court. All judgments shall be in writing and signed by a judge or a court
commissioner duly authorized to do so. The filing with the clerk of the judgment constitutes
entry of such judgment, and the judgment is not effective before such entry, except that in such
circumstances and on such notice as justice may require, the court may direct the entry of a
judgment nunc pro tunc, and the reasons for such direction shall be entered of record. The entry
of the judgment shall not be delayed for taxing costs.
B. Enforcement of Judgment; Special Writ. The court shall cause the judgment to be
carried into execution. When the judgment is for personal property, and it is shown by the
pleadings and found that the property has a special value to the petitioner, or prevailing party, the
court may award the petitioner or prevailing party a special writ for the seizure and delivery of
the property and may, in addition to the other relief granted, enforce its judgment in the manner
provided by law.
C. Objections to Form.
1. In case of a judgment other than for money or costs, or that all relief be denied,
the judgment shall not be settled, approved, and signed until the expiration of five (5)
days after the proposed form thereof has been served upon opposing counsel unless the
opposite party or that party's counsel endorses on the judgment an approval as to form.
The five-day provision may be waived by the court only upon an express written
finding by minute order or otherwise of necessity to shorten time or to enter judgment
without notice.
2. If objection to the form of the judgment is made within the time provided in
subdivision 1 of this paragraph, the party submitting the proposed form of judgment
may respond to the objection within five (5) days after service thereof, and the matter
shall thereafter be presented to the court for determination, without oral argument,
unless the court otherwise directs.
3. The requirements of this rule shall not apply to parties in default, or to
judgments, decrees or orders prepared originally by the court.
D. Minute Entries: Notice of Entry of Judgments. The clerk shall distribute, either by
U.S. mail, electronic mail, or attorney drop box, copies of all minute entries to all parties.
Immediately upon the entry of a judgment as defined in Rule 78(A), the clerk shall distribute,
either by U.S. mail, electronic mail, or attorney drop box, a notice of the entry of judgment
stating the date of entry, in the manner provided for in Rule 43, to every party who is not in
default for failure to appear, and shall make a record of the distribution. Any party may in
addition serve a notice of such entry, in the manner provided in Rule 43 for the service of papers.
In the case of a judgment in the form of a minute entry, the date of entry shall be the date on
which the clerk affixes a file stamp on the minute entry. Lack of notice of the entry by the clerk
does not affect the time to appeal or relieve or authorize the court to relieve a party for failure to
116appeal within the time allowed, except as provided in Rule 9(a), Arizona Rules of Civil Appellate
Procedure.
Notice of entry of judgment shall be accomplished by any of the following:
1. a specifically designated notice form;
2. a minute entry; and
3. a conformed copy of the file stamped judgment.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 58, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 82. Findings by the Court; Judgment on Partial Findings
A. Effect. In all family law proceedings tried upon the facts, the court, if requested before
trial, shall find the facts specially and state separately its conclusions of law thereon, and
judgment shall be entered pursuant to Rule 81. Requests for findings are not necessary for
purposes of review. Findings of fact, whether based on oral or documentary evidence, shall not
be set aside unless clearly erroneous, and due regard shall be given to the opportunity of the trial
court to judge the credibility of witnesses. The findings of a master, to the extent that the court
adopts them, shall be considered as the findings of the court. It will be sufficient if the findings
of fact and conclusions of law are stated orally and recorded in open court following the close of
the evidence or appear in an opinion or minute entry or memorandum of decision filed by the
court. Findings of fact and conclusions of law are unnecessary on decisions of motions under
Rules 32 and 79 or any other motion, except as provided in paragraph C.
B. Amendment. Upon motion of a party made not later than fifteen (15) days after entry of
judgment the court may amend its findings or make additional findings and may amend the
judgment accordingly. The motion may be made with a motion for a new trial pursuant to Rule
83. When findings of fact are made, the question of the sufficiency of the evidence to support the
findings may thereafter be raised whether or not the party raising the question has made in the
superior court an objection to such findings or has made a motion to amend them or a motion for
judgment.
C. Judgment on Partial Findings. If during a family law proceeding a party has been fully
heard on an issue and the court, after determining the facts, finds against the party on that issue,
the court may enter judgment as a matter of law against that party with respect to a claim or
defense that cannot under the controlling law be maintained or defeated without a favorable
finding on that issue, or the court may decline to render any judgment until the close of all the
evidence. Such a judgment shall be supported by findings of fact and conclusions of law, if
requested as required by paragraph A.
D. Submission on Agreed Statement of Facts. The parties to an action may submit the
matter in controversy to the court upon an agreed statement of facts, stated orally in open court
on the record, or signed by them and filed with the clerk, and the court shall render judgment
117thereon as in other cases. The agreed statement, certified by the court to be correct, and the
judgment shall constitute the record of the action.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 52, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 83. Motion for New Trial
A. Grounds. A ruling, decision or judgment may be vacated and a new trial granted on
motion of the aggrieved party for any of the following causes materially affecting that party's
rights:
1. irregularity in the proceedings of the court or a party, or abuse of discretion,
whereby the moving party was deprived of a fair trial;
2. misconduct of a party;
3. accident or surprise which could not have been prevented by ordinary prudence;
4. material evidence, newly discovered, which with reasonable diligence could not
have been discovered and produced at the trial;
5. error in the admission or rejection of evidence or other errors of law occurring at
the trial or during the progress of the action;
6. that the ruling, decision, findings of fact, or judgment is not justified by the
evidence or is contrary to law.
B. Scope. A new trial may be granted to all or any of the parties and on all or part of the
issues for any reasons for which new trials are authorized by law or rule of court. On a motion
for a new trial, the court may open the judgment, if one has been entered, take additional
testimony, amend findings of fact and conclusions of law or make new findings and conclusions,
and direct the entry of a new judgment.
C. Contents of Motion; Amendment; Rulings Reviewable.
1. The motion for new trial shall be in writing, shall specify generally the grounds
upon which the motion is based, and may be amended at any time before it is ruled
upon by the court.
2. Upon the general ground that the court erred in admitting or rejecting evidence,
the court shall review all rulings during the trial upon objections to evidence.
3. Upon the general ground that the decision, findings of fact, or judgment is not
justified by the evidence, the court shall review the sufficiency of the evidence.
118D. Procedure for Filing Motion for New Trial; New Trials Granted.
1. Time for Motion. A motion for new trial shall be filed not later than fifteen (15)
days after entry of the judgment.
2. Time for serving affidavits. When a motion for new trial is based upon affidavits
they shall be served with the motion. The opposing party has ten (10) days after such
service within which to serve opposing affidavits, which period may be extended for an
additional period not exceeding twenty (20) days either by the court for good cause
shown or by the parties by written stipulation. The court may permit reply affidavits.
3. Number of new trials. Not more than two (2) new trials shall be granted to either
party in the same action.
4. Specification of grounds for new trial in order. No order granting a new trial
shall be made and entered unless the order specifies with particularity the grounds on
which the new trial is granted.
E. New Trial Ordered On Initiative of Court. Not later than fifteen (15) days after entry
of judgment the court of its own initiative may order a new trial for any reason for which it might
have granted a new trial on motion of a party. After giving the parties notice and an opportunity
to be heard on the matter, the court may grant a motion for a new trial, timely served, for a
reason not stated in the motion. In either case, the court shall specify in the order the grounds
therefore.
F. Questions to Be Considered in New Trial. A new trial, if granted, shall be only a new
trial of the question or questions with respect to which the decision is found erroneous, if
separable.
G. After Service by Publication.
1. When judgment has been rendered on service by publication, and the defendant
has not appeared, a new trial may be granted upon application of the defendant for good
cause shown by affidavit, made within one (1) year after rendition of the judgment.
2. Execution of the judgment shall not be stayed, except on motion of the party or
the court’s own motion and order of the court. The court may require the respondent to
give a bond in an amount set by the court to assure that the party will prosecute the
application for a new trial and will satisfy such judgment as may be rendered by the
court should its decision be against the respondent.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 59, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 84. Motion to Alter or Amend a Judgment or Decree
A party seeking reconsideration, alteration, or amendment of a ruling of the court may file a
motion for alteration or amendment of a judgment of decree. All such motions, however
119denominated, shall be submitted without oral argument and without response or reply, unless the
court otherwise directs. No motion for alteration or amendment shall be granted, however,
without the court providing an opportunity for response. A motion authorized by this rule may
not be employed as a substitute for a motion pursuant to Rule 82(B), 83 or 85, and shall not
operate to extend the time within which a notice of appeal must be filed. Responsive pleadings
shall be filed no later than ten (10) days after filing of the motion to alter or amend the judgment
or order, except as otherwise ordered by the court.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 59(l), Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 85. Motion to Correct Mistakes; Relief from a Judgment or Decree
A. Clerical Mistakes. Clerical mistakes in judgments, orders, or other parts of the record
and errors therein arising from oversight or omission may be corrected by the court at any time
of its own initiative or on motion of any party and after such notice, if any, as the court orders.
During pendency of an appeal, such mistakes may be so corrected before the appeal is docketed
in the appellate court, and thereafter while the appeal is pending may be so corrected with leave
of the appellate court.
B. Correction of Error in Record of Judgment.
1. When a mistake in a judgment or decree is corrected as provided by paragraph
A, thereafter the execution shall conform to the judgment as corrected.
2. Where there is a mistake, miscalculation, or misrecital of a sum of money or of a
name, and there is among the records of the action a verdict or instrument in writing
whereby such judgment may be safely corrected, the court shall, on application and
after notice, correct the judgment accordingly.
C. Mistake; Inadvertence; Surprise; Excusable Neglect; Newly Discovered Evidence;
Fraud, etc.
1. On motion and upon such terms as are just the court may relieve a party or a
party's legal representative from a final judgment, order or proceeding for the following
reasons:
a.mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect;
b. newly discovered evidence, which by due diligence could not have been
discovered in time to move for a new trial under Rule 83(A);
c. fraud, misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverse party;
d. the judgment is void;
120e. the judgment has been satisfied, released, or discharged, or a prior
judgment on which it is based has been reversed or otherwise vacated, or it is
no longer equitable that the judgment should have prospective application; or
f. any other reason justifying relief from the operation of the judgment.
2. The motion shall be filed within a reasonable time, and for reasons (1), (2), and
(3) not more than six (6) months after the judgment or order was entered or proceeding
was taken.
3. A motion under this subdivision does not affect the finality of a judgment or
suspend its operation. This rule does not limit the power of a court to entertain an
independent action to relieve a party from a judgment, order, or proceeding, or to grant
relief to a defendant served by publication as provided by Rule 83(G), or to set aside a
judgment for fraud upon the court. The procedure for obtaining any relief from a
judgment shall be by motion as prescribed in these rules or by an independent action.
D. Reversed Judgment of Foreign State. When a judgment has been rendered upon the
judgment of another state or foreign country, and the foreign judgment is thereafter reversed or
set aside by a court of such state or foreign country, the court in which judgment was rendered in
this state shall set aside, vacate and annul its judgment.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 60, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 86. Harmless Error
No error in either the admission or the exclusion of evidence and no error or defect in any
ruling or order or in anything done or omitted by the court or by any of the parties is ground for
granting a new trial or for setting aside a verdict or for vacating, modifying or otherwise
disturbing a judgment or order, unless refusal to take such action appears to the court
inconsistent with substantial justice. The court at every stage of the proceeding must disregard
any error or defect in the proceeding which does not affect the substantial rights of the parties.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 61, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 87. Stay of Proceedings
A. Stay on Motion for New Trial or for Judgment. Except as otherwise provided in Rule
7, Arizona Rules of Civil Appellate Procedure, in its discretion and on such conditions for the
security of the adverse party as are proper, the court may stay the execution of any proceedings
to enforce a judgment, pending the disposition of a motion for a new trial or to alter or amend a
judgment made pursuant to Rule 83 or 84, or of a motion for relief from a judgment or order
made pursuant to Rule 85, or of a motion for amendment to the findings or for additional
121findings made pursuant to Rule 82(B), or when justice so requires in other cases until such time
as the court may fix.
B. Stay of Judgment Directing Execution of Instrument; Sale of Perishable Property
and Disposition of Proceeds.
1. If the judgment or order appealed from directs the execution of a conveyance or
other instrument, the execution of the judgment or order shall not be stayed by the
appeal until the instrument is executed and deposited with the clerk of the superior court
to abide the judgment of the Supreme Court.
2. A judgment or order directing the sale of perishable property shall not be stayed,
but the proceeds of the sale shall be deposited with the clerk of the superior court to
abide the appeal.
C. Stay in Favor of the State or Agency or Political Subdivision Thereof. Money
judgments against the state or agency or political subdivision thereof are automatically stayed
when an appeal is filed. Judgments against the state or agency or political subdivision thereof
other than money judgments are not automatically stayed when an appeal is filed, but as to them,
no bond can be required if a stay is ordered.
D. Stay of Judgment under Rule 78(B). When a court has ordered a final judgment under
the conditions stated in Rule 78(B), the court may stay enforcement of that judgment until the
entering of a subsequent judgment or judgments and may prescribe such conditions as are
necessary to secure the benefit thereof to the party in whose favor the judgment is entered.
E. Stay of Judgments in Rem. No execution or other process shall issue on judgments in
rem disposing of an interest in property, in connection with which a proper claim was timely
filed and the claimant is not in default, until fifteen (15) days after the time for filing a notice of
appeal begins. Within such fifteen-day period, no such judgment shall be self-executing.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 62, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 88. Disability of a Judge
If a trial or hearing has been commenced and the judge is unable to proceed, any other judge
may proceed with it upon certifying familiarity with the record and determining that the
proceedings in the case may be completed without prejudice to the parties. In a hearing or trial
without a jury, the successor judge shall at the request of a party recall any witness whose
testimony is material and disputed and who is available to testify again without undue burden.
The successor judge may also recall any other witness.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 63, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
122Rule 89. Judgment for Specific Acts; Vesting Title
A. Judgment for Specific Acts. If a judgment directs a party to execute a conveyance of
land or to deliver deeds or other documents or to perform any other specific act and the party
fails to comply within the time specified, the court may direct the act to be done at the cost of the
disobedient party by some other person appointed by the court, and the act when so done has like
effect as if done by the party. On application of the party entitled to performance, the clerk shall
issue a writ of attachment or sequestration against the property of the disobedient party to
compel obedience to the judgment. The court may also in proper cases adjudge the party in
contempt.
B. Vesting Title. If real or personal property is within the state, the court, in lieu of directing
a conveyance thereof, may enter a judgment divesting the title of any party and vesting it in
others, and such judgment has the effect of a conveyance executed in due form of law. When any
order or judgment is for the delivery of possession, the party in whose favor it is entered is
entitled to a writ of execution or assistance upon application to the clerk.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 70, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 90. Process on Behalf of and Against Persons Not Parties
When an order is made in favor of a person who is not a party to the action, that person may
enforce obedience to the order by the same process as if a party, and, when obedience to an order
may be lawfully enforced against a person who is not a party, that person is liable to the same
process for enforcing obedience to the order as if a party.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 71, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
123XI. POST-DECREE/POST-JUDGMENT PROCEEDINGS
Rule 91. Post-Decree/Post-Judgment Proceedings
A. Modification or Enforcement of Prior Orders; General Provisions.
1. A party seeking to modify or enforce a prior family court order shall file a
petition with the clerk of the court setting forth with specificity all relief requested, and
pay the required filing fee. Except as to petitions filed by the state in Title IV-D matters,
all petitions to enforce or modify shall be under oath. The petition shall indicate, at a
minimum, the nature of the proceeding, the estimated time for the entire hearing, and
the relief sought.
2. All petitions to enforce or modify a prior order of the court shall set forth the
pertinent portion of the prior order, the date the order was entered, and the name and
location of the court that entered the order. In the event the pertinent portion of the prior
order is so voluminous as to make it impractical to include it in the petition verbatim
and the order is contained in the official court file of the case, the pertinent portion of
the order may be incorporated into the petition by reference.
3. The parties in all post-decree/post-judgment petitions, motions and documents
shall be denominated as they were in the Decree or Judgment. The term “applicant” as
used in this rule refers only to the petitioner or respondent who is filing the petition to
enforce or modify.
4. Whenever the term “Affidavit of Financial Information” is used in this rule,
parties shall refer to the relevant Form 2, Rule 97.
B. Petitions for Modification of Spousal Maintenance or Child Support.
1. Petition for Modification of Spousal Maintenance. A petition for modification of
spousal maintenance shall comply with paragraph A, and shall set forth the substantial
and continuing changes in circumstances supporting a modification, and the applicant
shall attach to and file with the original petition a current Affidavit of Financial
Information. A copy of the petition, the Affidavit of Financial Information, and the
issued Order to Appear shall be served upon the opposing party along with a blank copy
of an Affidavit of Financial Information within the time provided by paragraph L. The
opposing party shall respond by filing and serving a completed Affidavit of Financial
Information within the time provided by paragraph M.
2. Petition for Modification of Child Support.
a. Order to Appear. A petition for modification of child support shall
comply with paragraph A and shall set forth the substantial and continuing
changes in circumstances supporting a modification. The applicant shall attach
to and file with the original petition a current Affidavit of Financial
Information. A copy of the petition, the Affidavit of Financial Information, and
the issued Order to Appear shall be served upon the opposing party, along with
124a blank copy of an Affidavit of Financial Information within the time provided
by paragraph L. The opposing party shall respond by filing and serving a
completed Affidavit of Financial Information within the time provided by
paragraph M. Both parties shall also within the time provided by paragraph M
serve upon the other party and bring to the hearing copies of the documents
and information set forth in paragraph P.
b. Request for Simplified Procedure. A party seeking to modify child
support by use of the Simplified Procedure for modification outlined in the
Arizona Child Support Guidelines shall file with the clerk of the court a request
for Simplified Modification, accompanied by a sworn Parent’s Worksheet for
Child Support Amount, and pay the required filing fee. The parties shall then
follow the procedures specified in the Arizona Child Support Guidelines,
Appendix to A.R.S. § 25-320.
c. Title IV-D. In Title IV-D matters, the state shall serve both parents with
the petition or request, the issued Order to Appear, and a blank Affidavit of
Financial Information, with instructions to complete, file, and serve the
Affidavit as required by paragraph M.
C. Petition for Enforcement of Child Support or Spousal Maintenance. A petition to
enforce an order to pay spousal maintenance, child support, medical or dental costs, or other
sums due pursuant to a child support order shall comply with paragraph A, and shall include a
current summary calculation of arrears derived from the clearinghouse records of the Department
of Child Support Enforcement, if available, or if not available, a statement of all sums due. If the
petition includes a request for reimbursement of medical, dental, or vision costs, the petition
shall include a detailed summary of all medical, dental, and vision bills claimed, the amount of
each bill paid by insurance or other third party, the amount of each bill paid by each party, the
remaining unpaid balance, and the remaining pro rata obligation of each party, in a form
substantially in accord with a worksheet for unreimbursed health care and other allowed
expenses, as required by the court. A copy of the petition and issued Order to Appear shall be
served upon the opposing party along with a blank copy of an Affidavit of Financial Information
within the time provided by paragraph L. The opposing party shall respond by filing and serving
a completed Affidavit of Financial Information within the time provided by paragraph M, along
with copies of the following documents:
1. that party's most recently filed federal and state income tax returns, with all
schedules;
2. that party's four most recent consecutive wage statements from all employment;
3. that party's most recent W-2, 1099, and K-1 forms, as applicable; and
4. where the opposing party claims sums sought by the applicant have been paid,
receipts or statements supporting the opposing party’s claim.
125D. Petition to Modify Child Custody. No hearing for modification of a child custody order
or decree shall be set unless there is compliance with A.R.S. § 25-411 and the requirements set
forth in this paragraph.
1. Any party seeking a modification of child custody shall file with the clerk of the
court, and provide a copy to the assigned division of, the following:
a. a Petition for Modification of Child Custody, either verified by the
moving party or supported by the requisite affidavit(s) pursuant to A.R.S. § 25-
411, in compliance with paragraph A, and including a certification whether the
underlying custody order or agreement contains a provision requiring the
parties to pursue mediation or other alternate dispute resolution process prior to
requesting court relief for modification, and, if so, what efforts have been made
to comply with that provision;
b. a Notice of Filing Petition for Modification of Child Custody directed to
all persons entitled to notice pursuant to A.R.S. § 25-1035; and
c. in actions in which the custody order or decree was not entered by an
Arizona court, an affidavit required by A.R.S. § 25-1039.
2. The clerk of the superior court shall issue the Notice of Filing Petition for
Modification of Child Custody.
3. The verified petition or affidavits and the issued Notice of Filing Petition for
Modification of Child Custody shall be served on all persons entitled to notice, pursuant
to the appropriate provisions of Rule 41, 42, or 43, whichever is applicable.
4. Unless otherwise ordered by the court, all persons entitled to notice shall file
within twenty (20) days from the date of service a response or controverting affidavits.
A copy of each document shall be provided to the applicant’s attorney or, if
unrepresented, the applicant and, unless otherwise provided by local rule, to the
assigned division.
5. No sooner than five (5) days after expiration of the time permitted for the filing
of the response or the controverting affidavits, either party or attorney shall provide the
Request for Order Granting or Denying Custody Hearing to the assigned division.
6. The court, in accordance with A.R.S.§ 25-411 and without argument or hearing
unless set by the court on its own motion, shall determine whether a custody hearing
should be granted. A copy of the court's determination shall be mailed by the court to all
persons entitled to notice. If the court determines that a custody hearing is warranted,
the court shall schedule a Resolution Management Conference or evidentiary hearing.
E. Petition to Relocate or Prevent Relocation.
1. A petition to relocate or prevent the relocation of a minor child pursuant to
A.R.S. § 25-408 shall be considered a request to modify a prior court order and shall
comply with the provisions of this rule.
1262. If a petition to relocate or to prevent the relocation of a minor child requests a
change of legal custody, the parties shall comply with the provisions of paragraph D.
F. Petition for Modification or Clarification of Parenting Time or Visitation.
1. Any party seeking a modification or clarification of parenting time or visitation
that does not involve a change of joint custody, joint legal custody, joint physical
custody or sole custody, shall file with the clerk of the court, and provide a copy to the
assigned division of, the following:
a. a Petition for Modification or Clarification of Parenting Time or
Visitation in compliance with paragraph A that sets forth detailed facts
supporting the requested modification or clarification, the particular type of
custody and specific parenting time or visitation plan sought, and a
certification whether the underlying parenting time or visitation order or
agreement contains a provision requiring the parties to pursue mediation or
other alternative dispute resolution process prior to requesting the court to
modify or clarify the order or agreement;
b. if the applicant seeks an order of supervision or denial of parenting time
or visitation, a statement in the petition detailing facts as to why unrestricted
parenting time would seriously endanger the child’s physical, mental, moral, or
emotional health; and
c. in actions in which the parenting time or visitation order was not entered
by an Arizona court, an affidavit required by A.R.S. § 25-1039.
2. A copy of the petition and affidavit (if required), and an original Order to Appear
to be issued by the court shall be provided to the assigned division at the time of filing.
A copy of the petition, affidavit (if required), and Order to Appear shall be served upon
the opposing party within the time provided by paragraph L.
G. Petition for Enforcement of Custody or Parenting Time; Warrant to Take Physical
Custody.
1 Any party seeking to enforce an existing custody, parenting time, or visitation
order, shall file with the clerk of the court, and provide a copy to the assigned division
of, the following:
a. a Petition for Enforcement of Custody, Parenting Time, or Visitation
Order in compliance with paragraph A and all legal requirements, including
any applicable provisions of A.R.S. § 25-1058, that includes detailed facts
supporting a violation of the order or enforcement action and the specific
remedy or remedies sought;
b. if the applicant seeks a warrant to take physical custody of a child, the
petition shall comply with the provisions of A.R.S. § 25-1061.
1272. A copy of the petition, an original Order for Issuance of a Warrant for Physical
Custody, and an original Warrant for Physical Custody if requested in the petition, and
an original Order to Appear to be issued by the court shall be provided to the assigned
division at the time of filing. A copy of the petition, Order and Warrant, if issued, and
the issued Order to Appear shall be served upon the opposing party within the time
provided by paragraph L.
H. Other Post-Decree and Post-Judgment Petitions. Any party seeking any other post-
decree or post-judgment relief not specifically addressed in this rule shall file a petition in
compliance with paragraph A setting forth detailed facts supporting the requested relief, together
with the specific legal authority that confers subject matter jurisdiction upon or authorizes the
family court to grant the relief requested. A copy of the petition and an original Order to Appear
to be issued by the court shall be provided to the assigned division at the time of filing. A copy
of the petition and the issued Order to Appear shall be served upon the opposing party within the
time provided by paragraph L.
I. Temporary Orders. A request for post-decree or post-judgment temporary orders, if any,
shall be filed in accordance with Rule 47.
J. Contempt. An action for contempt shall comply, where applicable, with the provisions of
this rule and with the provisions of Rule 92.
K. Order to Appear. An Order to Appear submitted to the court for issuance shall include
the information set forth in Form 14, Rule 97. Any original Order to Appear, other order, or
warrant required to be submitted to the court for issuance under these rules shall be accompanied
by two (2) or more copies of such order or warrant, equal to the number of parties in the action,
to be returned to the applicant for service upon all other parties in the action entitled to notice.
L. Time for Service. Unless otherwise specifically required by law or these rules, all
petitions, orders, warrants, and affidavits in support of post-decree or post-judgment relief shall
be promptly served upon all opposing parties in the manner required by Rules 40, 41, 42, and 43,
at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled conference or hearing, unless another specific time is
ordered by the court.
M. Responses; Time for Response. Unless otherwise specifically required by law or these
rules, a party served with a petition for post-decree/post-judgment relief is not required to file a
formal response to the petition. All responses and affidavits required to be filed by these rules
shall be filed and served upon the applicant’s attorney, or if unrepresented, the applicant, within
ten (10) days after service of the petition on the party, but in no event less than three (3) judicial
days prior to the scheduled hearing, unless another specific time is ordered by the court.
N. Hearings on Motions and Petitions. Matters brought before the court by motion may be
heard by oral argument without testimony. Matters that will require testimony at an evidentiary
hearing shall be brought before the court by a Petition for Order to Appear and shall indicate that
testimony will be required. Upon receipt of a proper Petition for Order to Appear, the court shall
schedule the petition for an evidentiary hearing, a return hearing, oral argument, a post-decree or
post-judgment conference, mediation, or other proceeding, and issue an appropriate Order to
128Appear. The Order to Appear shall state the scheduled date and time and length thereof, and
whether evidence will be received at the hearing or conference.
O. Mediation. The court may require, by local rule, or on the court’s own initiative, that the
parties submit to mediation before any issues of custody, parenting time or visitation may be
heard. As to those matters for which mediation is not required, the parties, unless otherwise
ordered by the court, shall personally meet and confer in a good faith effort to resolve any
disputes prior to proceeding to hearing and shall be required, at the time of hearing, to avow to
the court their efforts to do so.
P. Disclosure.
1. In any proceeding for modification of child support or spousal maintenance, or
for attorneys’ fees and expenses, each party shall provide to the other party or parties,
including the state, if applicable, copies of the following documents:
a. that party’s most recently filed federal and state income tax returns, with
all schedules;
b. that party’s four most recent consecutive wage statements from all
employment;
c. that party’s most recent federal tax W-2, 1099, and K-1 forms, as
applicable; and
d. in modification of child support proceedings, an employer provided
statement of the cost of medical and dental insurance coverage for the parties’
minor child(ren).
2. In addition to the above documents, each party shall likewise disclose, in writing,
the following:
a. all exhibits intended to be used at any evidentiary hearing; and
b. the names, addresses, and current telephone numbers of any witnesses
and a description of the substance of each witness’s expected testimony.
3. Upon motion of any party, or by the court’s own motion, additional disclosure
may be ordered.
4. The provisions of this rule do not preclude any party from requesting additional
documents or information through discovery procedures.
5. Unless otherwise ordered by the court, the information and documents required
to be disclosed shall be served in such a manner as to assure their receipt as soon as
possible after the initiation of proceedings, but in no event less than three (3) judicial
days prior to the scheduled hearing, absent good cause shown.
129Q. Sanctions. If a party or attorney fails to obey a scheduling or pre-hearing order or any
provision of this rule, or if no appearance is made on behalf of a party at a post-decree or post-
judgment conference, an evidentiary hearing, or other scheduled hearing, or if a party or a party’s
attorney is substantially unprepared to participate in the conference or hearing, or if a party or
party’s attorney fails to participate in good faith in a conference, hearing, or in the preparation of
a resolution statement or joint pre-hearing statement, the judge, upon motion or the judge’s own
initiative, shall, except upon a showing of good cause, make such orders with regard to such
conduct as are just, including, without limitation, those listed in Rule 76(D).
R. Dismissal of Petition For Lack of Prosecution. If a petition to enforce or modify a prior
family court decree, judgment, or order is filed but not presented in proper form as required by
these rules to the assigned division within one hundred twenty (120) days, is filed but not served
upon the adverse party within one hundred twenty (120) days after filing, or is otherwise
abandoned by the appearing parties with no activity for one hundred twenty (120) days, and there
are no hearings or conferences scheduled with respect to the petition, the court may issue a
notice that the petition will be dismissed by the court in no less than sixty (60) days without
further notice, unless prior to the expiration of the sixty (60) days service is completed and
further hearing is requested, or the court sets the petition for further proceedings. If a petition to
enforce or modify a prior family court decree, judgment or order is filed but not presented in
proper form as required by these rules to the assigned division within one (1) year, is filed but
not served upon the adverse party within one (1) year after filing, or is otherwise abandoned by
the appearing parties with no activity for one (1) year, and there are no hearings or conferences
scheduled with respect to the petition, the court may dismiss the petition without prejudice and
without further notice. The court may delay these dismissal dates for good cause shown upon
motion of any party or on the court’s initiative.
S. Attorneys’ Fees, Costs, and Expenses. In any post decree/post-judgment proceeding in
which an award of attorneys’ fees, costs, and expenses is an issue, both parties shall file a
completed Affidavit of Financial Information. If sought by the applicant, the Affidavit of
Financial Information shall be filed with the petition and served upon the opposing party along
with a blank copy of a Affidavit of Financial Information. The opposing party shall respond by
filing a completed Affidavit of Financial Information that shall be provided to the applicant’s
attorney, or if unrepresented, to the applicant, as soon as possible after service but in no event
less than three (3) judicial days prior to the scheduled hearing, unless another specific time is
ordered by the court. If the opposing party initiates a request for attorneys’ fees, costs, and
expenses, a completed Affidavit of Financial Information shall be filed with the court and served
upon the applicant’s attorney or, if unrepresented, the applicant within five (5) judicial days after
service and the applicant shall respond by filing a completed Affidavit of Financial Information
to be provided to the opposing party’s attorney, or if unrepresented, the opposing party, not less
than three (3) judicial days prior to the scheduled hearing, unless another specific time is ordered
by the court.
T. Stipulations. Stipulations to modify or enforce post-decree or post-judgment orders need
not be notarized, except that stipulations that substantially change the terms of a custody or
parenting time order shall meet the requirements of Rule 14(A).
130XII. CIVIL CONTEMPT AND ARREST WARRANTS
Rule 92. Civil Contempt and Sanctions for Non-Compliance with a Court Order
A. Applicability. This rule governs civil contempt proceedings in all matters related to
family law cases. The use of civil contempt sanctions under this rule shall be limited to
compelling compliance with a court order or compensating a movant for losses sustained as a
result of a contemnor’s failure to comply with a court order. Contempt sanctions intended to
punish an offender or to vindicate the authority of the court are criminal in nature and not
governed by this rule. The applicability of this rule and the sanctions provided for herein shall be
in addition to those procedures and sanctions set forth for a child support arrest warrant in Title
25, A.R.S.
B. Motion and Notice. Civil contempt may be initiated by motion that recites the essential
facts alleged to be contemptuous. No civil contempt may be imposed without notice to the
alleged contemnor and without providing the alleged contemnor with an opportunity to be heard.
The civil contempt motion and order to show cause or order to appear containing the hearing
date and time must be personally served upon the alleged contemnor.
C. Order to Show Cause or Order to Appear. The order to show cause or order to appear
must specify the time and place of the hearing and must contain the following language:
FAILURE TO APPEAR AT THE HEARING MAY RESULT IN THE
COURT ISSUING A CIVIL ARREST WARRANT, OR WHERE
APPLICABLE, A CHILD SUPPORT ARREST WARRANT, FOR YOUR
ARREST. IF YOU ARE ARRESTED, YOU MAY BE HELD IN JAIL FOR
NO MORE THAN 24 HOURS BEFORE A HEARING IS HELD.
D. Hearing. The court shall make an express finding as to whether the alleged contemnor
had notice of the motion and order to show cause. The court shall determine whether movant has
established that a prior order was entered and that the alleged contemnor had notice of the prior
order and has willfully failed to comply with the order.
E. Order and Sanctions. After hearing the testimony and evidence presented, the court
shall enter a written order granting or denying the motion for contempt. An order finding the
alleged contemnor in contempt shall include the following:
1. a recital of facts on which the contempt finding is based, and
2. if the court finds it appropriate, a statement setting out appropriate sanctions to
obtain compliance with the order, including incarceration, seizure of property,
attorneys’ fees, costs, compensatory or coercive fines, parenting time to make-up for
time missed due to the contemnor, parent education classes, and any other coercive
sanction or relief permitted by law, provided the order includes a purge provision as set
forth in paragraph F of this rule.
F. Purge. If the court orders incarceration, a fine, or any other sanction for failure to comply
with a court order, the court shall set conditions for the purging of the contempt based on the
131contemnor’s present ability to comply. The court shall include in its order a separate affirmative
finding that the contemnor has the present ability to comply with the purge and the factual basis
for that finding. The court may grant the contemnor a reasonable time to comply with the purge
conditions. If the court orders incarceration but defers incarceration for more than twenty-four
(24) hours to allow the contemnor a reasonable time to comply with the purge conditions, and
the contemnor fails to comply within the time provided, the movant shall file an affidavit of
noncompliance with the court. The court may then issue a civil arrest warrant. Upon
incarceration, the contemnor must be brought before the court within twenty-four (24) hours for
a determination of whether the contemnor continues to have the present ability to comply with
the purge.
G. Review Hearings for Person Incarcerated for Contempt. If a person is incarcerated
for civil contempt after hearing in a family law case, a review hearing shall be set at least every
thirty-five (35) days as long as the person is incarcerated. At such hearing the court shall
determine if the person has been able to comply with the purge condition or amount of release
payment and review the person’s present ability to comply. The court shall continue or modify
the orders accordingly.
Rule 93. Seizure of Person or Property
At the commencement of and during the course of an action, all remedies providing for
seizure of person or property for the purpose of securing satisfaction of the judgment ultimately
to be entered in the action are available under circumstances and in a manner provided by law.
The remedies thus available include arrest, attachment, garnishment, replevin, sequestration, and
other corresponding or equivalent remedies, however designated and regardless of whether the
remedy is ancillary to an action or must be obtained by an independent action.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 64, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
Rule 94. Civil and Child Support Arrest Warrants
A. Definitions.
1. A “civil arrest warrant” is an order issued in a non-criminal matter directing to
any peace officer in the state to arrest the individual named therein and bring such
person before the court.
2. A “child support arrest warrant” is an order issued by a judicial officer in a non-
criminal child support matter, directing any peace officer in this state to arrest the
person named therein and bring such person before the court.
B. When Issued.
1. The court may, on motion of a party or on its own motion, issue a civil arrest
warrant if it finds that the person for whom the warrant is sought:
132a. having been ordered by the court to appear personally at a specific time
and location, and having received actual notice of such order, including a
warning that failure to appear may result in the issuance of a civil arrest
warrant, has failed to appear as ordered; or
b. having been personally served with a subpoena to appear in person, at a
specific time and location, including a warning that failure to appear may result
in the issuance of a civil arrest warrant, has failed to appear as ordered.
2. The court may in any action pursuant to A.R.S. 25-502, on motion of a party or
on its own motion, issue a child support arrest warrant as provided by A.R.S. § 25-
681(A).
C. Content of Warrant. The civil arrest or child support arrest warrant shall be ordered by
the judicial officer and issued by the clerk. It shall contain the name of the person to be arrested,
a description by which the person can be identified with reasonable certainty, and any
information required to enter the warrant into the Arizona criminal justice information system.
The warrant shall command that the person named be arrested and either remanded to the
custody of the sheriff or brought before the judicial officer or, if the judicial officer is absent or
unable to act, the nearest or most accessible judicial officer of the superior court in the same
county. A warrant that is issued pursuant to this rule remains in effect until it is executed or
extinguished by the court.
D. Bond and Release Amount.
1. A civil arrest warrant shall set forth a bond in a reasonable amount to guarantee
the appearance of the arrested person or an order that the arrested person be held
without bond until the arrested person is seen by a judicial officer. The procedure for
forfeiture of bonds in criminal cases shall apply.
2. A child support arrest warrant shall be issued in conformity to A.R.S. §§ 25-681
and 25-683. The court shall determine and the warrant shall state the amount the
arrested person shall pay in order to be released from custody.
E. Time and Manner of Execution.
1. A civil arrest warrant is executed by the arrest of the person named therein.
Unless the court otherwise directs upon a showing of good cause, a civil arrest warrant
shall not be executed between the hours of ten p.m. and six-thirty a.m. The arrested
person shall be brought before the issuing judicial officer, or if that judicial officer is
absent or unable to act, the nearest or most accessible judicial officer of the superior
court of the same county, within twenty-four (24) judicial business hours of the
execution of the warrant. If the person is arrested in a county other than the county of
issue, the arresting officer shall notify the sheriff in the county of issue, who shall, as
soon as possible, take custody of the arrested person to the issuing judicial officer.
2. A child support arrest warrant shall be executed in a time and manner in
conformity with A.R.S. § 25-682.
133F. Duty of Court after Execution of Warrant.
1. After execution of a civil arrest warrant, the judicial officer shall advise the
arrested person of the nature of the proceedings, set the least onerous terms and
conditions of release that reasonably guarantee the required appearance, and set the date
of the next court appearance.
2. After execution of a child support arrest warrant, the judicial officer shall
proceed in conformity with A.R.S. § 25-683.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 64.1, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, and A.R.S. §§ 25-681 to
25-685.
134XIII. OTHER FAMILY LAW SERVICES AND RESOURCES
Rule 95. Other Family Law Services and Resources
In addition to services prescribed elsewhere in these rules, the court may consider the
services set forth in this rule, if available, in a family law case.
A. Private Mental Health Services. In addition to conciliation services, the court may
order parties to engage in private mental health services, including, but not limited to,
counseling, custody evaluations, mental health evaluations, Parenting Coordinator services,
therapeutic supervision of parenting time, and other therapeutic interventions.
B. Substance Abuse Screening and Testing in Cases Where Custody or Parenting Time
Are at Issue. Upon an allegation or showing that a party has abused drugs or alcohol, including
prescription medication, the court may order substance abuse screening and random testing of
that party. The court shall designate the frequency of testing and apportion responsibility for
payment of screening and testing.
C. Parent Education. The court shall order the parties to engage in parent education as
required by Arizona law. The court may also order supplemental or additional education in
appropriate cases, such as parenting skills classes and parental conflict resolution classes.
D. Supervised Exchange; Supervised Parenting Time; Therapeutic Supervision. The
court shall take reasonable measures to protect the parties and their children from harm,
including, but not limited to, supervised exchanges of parenting time, supervised parenting time,
and therapeutic supervised parenting time.
E. Family Violence Prevention Services; Domestic Violence Shelters; Advocacy
Services. Goals of the court include prevention of domestic violence and protection of parties
and children from domestic violence. In pursuit of these goals, the court may implement family
violence prevention services, including, but not limited to, family violence prevention centers
and victim advocacy services. If the court finds evidence of domestic violence in cases, the court
may refer parties to services that the court deems appropriate for victims and batterers.
F. Batterer Intervention and Prevention Programs. If the court finds evidence that a
party has committed domestic violence or may commit domestic violence in the future, the court
may order the person to attend a Batterer Intervention and Prevention Program approved by the
Arizona Department of Health Services. A list of providers is available at the Arizona
Department of Health Services website.
G. Real Estate Special Commissioner. The court may appoint a real estate special
commissioner, in accordance with local rule or policy and procedure, to assist the parties in the
division and disposition of community real property when the parties are otherwise unable to
agree on such issues.
H. Title IV-D Services. Title IV-D Services may be provided in a Title IV-D case. A person
may apply for Title IV-D Services at the Division of Child Support Enforcement (DCSE) of the
Department of Economic Security.
135Rule 96. [Reserved]
136XIV. FAMILY LAW FORMS
Rule 97. Family Law Forms and Appendix
A. Family Law Forms
The forms listed and included in this rule meet the requirements of these rules. These forms may be
adapted to minimize or delete information that does not apply to a particular case, and to facilitate the
use of automated or prompted computer forms programs to prepare streamlined and concise forms,
provided that all information applicable to the case is included. The deletion of information required by
a form or the failure to complete a portion of a form is a representation to the court and to all adverse
parties that the question(s) or item(s) are not applicable. Any such form may be modified for
submission at times and under circumstances provided for by an Administrative Order entered by the
presiding judge of the county or the presiding judge’s designee. These forms and other family law
forms are available at the Court’s Self-Services Center, if any, or at the Supreme Court of Arizona’s
website: http://www.supreme.state.az.us/nav2/selfserv.htm. These forms may be modified from time to
time, and the modified forms will also be available at this website and self-service centers.
COMMITTEE COMMENT
This rule is based on Rule 84, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure.
INDEX OF FORMS
Notice of Limited Scope Representation
Affidavit of Financial Information
Confidential Sensitive Data Form
Proposed Dissolution Resolution Statement
Proposed Paternity Resolution Statement
Joint Alternative Dispute Resolution Statement to The Court
Uniform Family Law Interrogatories
Consent Decree of Dissolution of Marriage (Divorce) With Children
Parenting Coordinator’s Report and Recommendations
Order Regarding Parenting Coordinator’s Report and Recommendations
Parent Information Regarding the Use Of Parenting Coordinators
Inventory of Property and Debts
Order to Appear Temporary Orders
Order to Appear Post Judgment/Decree
Request for Protected Address and Order for Protected Address
Form 1. Form 2. Form 3. Form 4. Form 5. Form 6. Form 7. Form 8. Form 9. Form 10. Form 11. Form 12. Form 13. Form 14. Form 15. 137FORM 1: NOTICE OF LIMITED SCOPE REPRESENTATION
Name:
Mailing Address:
City, State, Zip Code:
Daytime Phone Number:
Evening Phone Number:
Representing: State Bar Number:
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
[ ] Self [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
Case No.
Petitioner/Plaintiff ATLAS No.
NOTICE OF LIMITED SCOPE
Respondent/Defendant REPRESENTATION
COMES NOW the undersigned attorney and enters a Notice of Limited Appearance for [ ] Petitioner
[ ] Respondent , pursuant to ARFLP 27.
1. Counsel’s appearance in this matter shall be limited in scope to the following matter(s): (Select
all that are applicable, and provide detailed description of services, including any scheduled
appearances, as needed.)
[ ] Protective Orders
[ ] Order of Protection
[ ] Injunction Against Harassment
[ ] Injunction Against Workplace Harassment
Voluntary acknowledgment of paternity
Establishment of Child Support (IV-D)
Rule 38(b) motion (specify)
[ ] U.C.C.J.E.A. Hearing
[ ] [ ] [ ] [ ] Temporary Orders (Pre-Decree) (specify any limitations)
[ ] Accelerated or Expedited Petition (Pre-Decree)
[ ] Resolution Management Conference
[ ] Arbitration
[ ] Mediation
[ ] Other ADR Process (specify)
[ ] Settlement Conference
138Case No. _________________________
[ ] [ ] Expedited Services Conference (specify type, e.g. child support establishment,
enforcement, or modifications; custody or parenting time enforcement or modification; or
other)
Enforcement of Decree or Order (specify, as follows):
[ ] Child support
[ ] Custody & parenting time
[ ] Spousal maintenance
[ ] Property/debt issues
[ ] Other:
[ ] Modification of Decree or Order (specify as follows):
[ ] Child support
[ ] Custody & parenting time
[ ] Spousal maintenance
[ ] Other:
[ ] Emergency Petition (Post-Decree)
[ ] Qualified Domestic Relations Order
[ ] [ ] Filing of Foreign Decree
Warrant to take Physical Custody
[ ] Child Custody or Parenting Time by a Non-parent
[ ] [ ] [ ] Other motion and hearing thereon, specifically:
Attend Deposition(s) of (names)
Conduct the following discovery:
[ ] Other:
139Case No. _________________________
2. 3. 4. 5. Counsel named above is attorney of record and available for service of process in accordance
with Rule 27, ARFLP. Service on counsel shall be valid, to the extent permitted by statute and
Rule 43(C), in all matters in the case but shall not extend the counsel’s responsibility for
representation of the client beyond the specific matter for which the attorney has appeared. For
service directly upon the party, the party’s name, address and phone number are listed below.
Name:
Address:
City, State Zip Code:
Telephone:
The opposing party, or his/her counsel [ ] may [ ] may not directly contact the party represented
by the undersigned attorney regarding matters outside the scope of this limited representation
without first consulting the undersigned attorney.
Counsel’s representation of client will terminate at the conclusion of the hearing noted above, if
shown, or at the conclusion of the matter noted above, upon the filing of a Notice of Withdrawal
of Attorney, pursuant to Rule 27, ARFLP.
This accurately sets forth the terms of the written agreement between counsel and the party for
limited scope legal representation.
Date Attorney
I have read and approve of this notice.
Date Client
ORIGINAL of the foregoing filed with the Clerk of the Superior Court;
COPIES of the foregoing mailed/delivered this day of , , to:
The Honorable
By:
Attorney for
140FORM 2: AFFIDAVIT OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Name:
Mailing Address:
City, State, Zip Code:
Daytime Phone Number:
Evening Phone Number:
Representing: State Bar Number:
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
[ ] Self [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
Case No.
Petitioner/Plaintiff ATLAS No.
Respondent Affidavit of
AFFIDAVIT OF FINANCIAL
INFORMATION
(Name of Person Whose Information is on this
Affidavit)
IMPORTANT INFORMATION ABOUT THIS DOCUMENT
WARNING TO BOTH PARTIES: This Affidavit is an important document. You must fill out this
Affidavit completely, and provide accurate information. You must provide copies of this Affidavit and
all other required documents to the other party and to the judge. If you do not do this, the court may
order you to pay a fine.
I have read the following document and know of my own knowledge that the facts and financial
information stated below are true and correct, and that any false information may constitute perjury by
me. I also understand that, if I fail to provide the required information or give misinformation, the judge
may order sanctions against me, including assessment of fees for fines under Rule 31, Arizona Rules of
Family Law Procedure.
Date Signature of Person Making Affidavit
141Case No. _________________________
2. EMPLOYMENT INFORMATION
A. Your job/occupation/profession/title:
Name and address of current employer:
B. C. Date employment began:
How often are you paid: [ ] Weekly [ ] Every other week [ ] Monthly [ ] Twice a month
[ ] Other
If you are not working, why not?
Previous employer name and address:
Date previous job ended:
D. Previous job/occupation/profession/title:
Date previous job began: Reason you left job:
Gross monthly pay at previous job: $
Total gross income from last three (3) years’ tax returns (attach copies of pages 1 and 2 of your
federal income tax returns for the last three (3) years):
Year $ Year $ Year $
E. Your total gross income from January 1 of this year to the date of this Affidavit (year-to-date
income): $
3. YOUR EDUCATION/TRAINING: List name of school, length of time there, year of last
attendance, and degree earned:
A. High School:
B. College:
C. Post-Graduate:
D. Occupational Training:
4. YOUR GROSS MONTHLY INCOME:
• List all income you receive from any source, whether private or governmental, taxable or not.
• List all income payable to you individually or payable jointly to you and your spouse.
• Use a monthly average for items that vary from month to month.
• Multiply weekly income and deductions by 4.33. Multiply biweekly income by 2.165 to arrive
at the total amount for the month.
A. Gross salary/wages per month $
• Attach copies of your two most recent pay stubs.
Rate of Pay $ per [ ] hour [ ] week [ ] month [ ] year
B. Expenses paid for by your employer:
1. Automobile $
2. Auto expenses, such as gas, repairs, insurance $
3. Lodging $
4. Other (Explain) $
C. Commissions/Bonuses $
D. Tips $
E. Self-employment Income (See below) $
F. Social Security benefits $
143Case No. _________________________
G. Worker's compensation and/or disability income $
H. Unemployment compensation $
I. Gifts/Prizes $
J. Payments from prior spouse $
K. Rental income (net after expenses) $
L. Contributions to household living expense by others $
M. Other (Explain:) $
(Include dividends, pensions, interest, trust income, annuities
or royalties.)
TOTAL: $
1. SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME (if applicable):
If you are self-employed, attach of a copy of the Schedule C for your business from your last tax
return and the most recent income/expense statement from your business.
If self employed, provide the following information:
Name, address and telephone no. of business:
Type of business entity:
State and Date of incorporation:
Nature of your interest:
Nature of business:
Percent ownership:
Number of shares of stock:
Total issued and outstanding shares:
Gross sales/revenue last 12 months:
INSTRUCTIONS
Both parties must answer item 6 if either party asks for child support. These expenses include only
those expenses for children who are common to the parties, which means one party is the
birth/adoptive mother and the other is the birth/adoptive father of the children.
6. SCHEDULE OF ALL MONTHLY EXPENSES FOR CHILDREN:
• DO NOT LIST any expenses for the other party, or child(ren) who live(s) with the other party,
unless you are paying those expenses.
• Use a monthly average for items that vary from month to month.
• If you are listing anticipated expenses, indicate this by putting an asterisk (*) next to the
estimated amount.
A. HEALTH INSURANCE:
1. Total monthly cost $
2. Premium cost to insure you alone $
3. Premium cost to insure child(ren) common to the parties $
4. List all people covered by your insurance coverage:
144Case No. _________________________
Name of insurance company and Policy/Group Number:
5. B. DENTAL/VISION INSURANCE:
1. Total monthly cost $
2. Premium cost to insure you alone $
3. Premium cost to insure child(ren) common to the parties $
4. List all people covered by your insurance coverage:
5. Name of insurance company and Policy/Group Number:
C. UNREIMBURSED MEDICAL AND DENTAL EXPENSES:
(Cost to you after, or in addition to, any insurance reimbursement)
1. Drugs and medical supplies $
2. Other $
TOTAL: $
D. CHILD CARE COSTS:
1. Total monthly child care costs $
(Do not include amounts paid by D.E.S.)
2. Name(s) of child(ren) cared for and amount per child:
$
$
$
$
3. Name(s) and address(es) of child care provider(s):
E. EMPLOYER PRETAX PROGRAM:
Do you participate in an employer program for pretax payment of child care expenses (Cafeteria
Plan)? [ ] YES [ ] NO
F. COURT ORDERED CHILD SUPPORT:
1. Court ordered current child support for child(ren)
not common to the parties $
2. Amount of any arrears payment $
3. Amount per month actually paid in last 12 mos. $
• Attach proof that you are paying
4. Name(s) and relationship of minor child(ren) who you support
or who live with you, but are not common to the parties.
G. COURT ORDERED SPOUSAL MAINTENANCE/SUPPORT (Alimony):
1. Court ordered spousal maintenance/support you actually
pay to previous spouse: $
145Case No. _________________________
H. EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSES :
1. For Children (Educational Expense/Special Needs/Other): $
Explain:
2. For Self: $
Explain:
INSTRUCTIONS
Both parties must answer items 7 and 8 if either party is requesting:
• Spousal maintenance
• Division of expenses
• Attorneys’ fees and costs
• Adjustment or deviation from the child support amount
• Enforcement
7. SCHEDULE OF ALL MONTHLY EXPENSES:
• Do NOT list any expenses for the other party, or children who live with the other party unless
you are paying those expenses.
• Use a monthly average for items that vary from month to month.
• If you are listing anticipated expenses, indicate this by putting an asterisk (*) next to the
estimated amount.
A. HOUSING EXPENSES:
1. House payment:
a. First Mortgage $
b. Second Mortgage $
c. Homeowners Association Fee $
d. Rent $
2. Repair & upkeep $
3. Yard work/Pool/Pest Control $
4. Insurance & taxes not included in house payment $
5. Other (Explain) $
TOTAL: $
B. UTILITIES:
1. Water, sewer, and garbage $
2. Electricity $
3. Gas $
4. Telephone $
5. Mobile phone/pager $
6. Internet Provider $
7. Cable/Satellite television $
8. Other (Explain:) $
TOTAL: $
146Case No. _________________________
C. FOOD:
1. Food, milk, and household supplies $
2. School lunches $
3. Meals outside home $
TOTAL: $
D. CLOTHING:
1. Clothing for you $
2. Uniforms or special work clothes $
3. Clothing for children living with you $
4. Laundry and cleaning $
TOTAL: $
E. TRANSPORTATION OR AUTOMOBILE EXPENSES:
1. Car insurance $
2. List all cars and individuals covered:
3. Car payment, if any $
4. Car repair and maintenance $
5. Gas and oil $
6. Bus fare/parking fees $
7. Other (explain): $
TOTAL: $
F. MISCELLANEOUS:
1. School and school supplies $
2. School activities or fees $
3. Extracurricular activities of child(ren) $
4. Church/contributions $
5. Newspapers, magazines and books $
6. Barber and beauty shop $
7. Life insurance (beneficiary: ) $
8. Disability insurance $
9. Recreation/entertainment $
10. Child(ren)'s allowance(s) $
11. Union/Professional dues $
12. Voluntary retirement contributions and savings deductions $
13. Family gifts $
14. Pet Expenses $
15. Cigarettes $
16. Alcohol $
17. Other (explain): $
TOTAL: $
147Case No. _________________________
8. OUTSTANDING DEBTS AND ACCOUNTS: List all debts and installment payments you
currently owe, but do not include items listed in Item 8 “Monthly Schedule of Expenses”. Follow the
format below. Use additional paper if necessary.
Creditor Name Purpose of Debt Unpaid
Balance
Min.
Monthly
Payment
Date of
Your Last
Payment
Amount
of Your
Payment
148FORM 3: CONFIDENTIAL SENSITIVE DATA FORM
Name:
Mailing Address:
City, State, Zip Code:
Daytime Phone Number:
Evening Phone Number:
Representing: State Bar Number:
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
[ ] Self [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
Petitioner
Case No.
ATLAS No.
CONFIDENTIAL SENSITIVE DATA FORM
Date of Birth Social Security Number
Respondent
A. Personal Information:
Name Petitioner:
Respondent:
Child:
Child:
Child:
Child:
B. Financial Account Numbers (including credit cards, financial institution accounts, investments,
debts):
Financial Institution Type of Account Name(s) of Account Owner Account #
C. Pension and Retirement Accounts (including IRAs, 401Ks):
Financial Institution Type of Account Name(s) of Account Owner Account #
D. Life Insurance Policies:
Insurance Company Type of Policy Name(s) of Policy Owner Policy #
149FORM 4: PROPOSED DISSOLUTION RESOLUTION STATEMENT
Name:
Mailing Address:
City, State, Zip Code:
Daytime Phone Number:
Evening Phone Number:
Representing: State Bar Number:
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
[ ] Self [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
Petitioner/Plaintiff
Case No.
ATLAS No.
PROPOSED RESOLUTION STATEMENT
OF:
Respondent/Defendant [ ] HUSBAND
[ ] WIFE
Date of Marriage:
The undersigned party provides the following specific positions on each of the issues in this case (BE
SPECIFIC):
1. IV-D Case:
[ ] [ ] 2. I receive or have received public assistance which may include AFDC, TANF, or
AHCCCS for my child(ren) or me.
I have a case with the Division of Child Support Enforcement.
Custody: The parties have the following natural or adopted child(ren) in common. (If there are
no minor or disabled children common to the parties, skip to paragraph 3)
Child’s Name Date of Birth Age
The child(ren) should live primarily with [ ] Mother [ ] Father and have parenting time with [ ]
Mother [ ] Father as follows (check all that apply):
[ ] Generally in accordance with County Guidelines for reasonable
parenting time.
[ ] Model Parenting Time Plan
[ ] Every other weekend from at a.m./p.m. to
at a.m./p.m.
[ ] [ ] One-half of the holidays on an alternating basis.
[ ] For weeks in the summer.
Spring Break from school.
1503. 4. 5. Case No. _________________________
[ ] Other:
This should be a [ ] sole custody [ ] joint custody arrangement.
[ ] Mother [ ] Father [ ] Both parents should make decisions about the child(ren), such as
schools, doctors, etc.
Child Support: My position on the financial factors necessary to calculate child support under
the statewide child support guidelines is as follows: (If there are no minor or disabled children
common to the parties and were no minor or disabled children from the date the parties
separated, skip to paragraph 5)
Father’s Gross Monthly Income: $
Mother’s Gross Monthly Income: $
[ ] Father has other child(ren) not listed above whom he is supporting who live(s) in his
household.
[ ] Father has [ ] Mother has other child(ren) not listed above for whom he pays court-ordered child
support in the amount of $________________ per month.
other child(ren) not listed above whom she is supporting live(s) in her
household.
[ ] Mother has other child(ren) not listed above for whom she pays court-ordered
child support in the amount of $ per month.
[ ] Medical/Dental/Vision Insurance should be paid by [ ] Mother [ ] Father. What if one
parent is paying medical and the other dental? The monthly cost for the child(ren) in this
case is $
Monthly Child Care Costs for child(ren) in this case is $ .
Extra Education Expenses or Extraordinary Child Adjustments - I believe the court
should add the following to the child support calculation (leave blank if none claimed):
Description Monthly Amount
[ ] [ ] [ ] Uninsured Medical/Dental/Vision Expenses should be paid:
[ ] Pro rata based upon each party’s income, as provided in the guidelines; or
[ ] Other: % paid d by Father and % paid by Mother.
[ ] Tax Exemptions for the child(ren) should be divided:
[ ] Pro rata based upon each party’s income, as provided in the guidelines; or
[ ] Other:
Past Support should be paid by [ ] Mother [ ] Father for the period of
through in the amount of $ .
Spousal Maintenance: My position on spousal maintenance is:
[ ] No spousal maintenance need be paid by either me or my spouse.
[ ] I should pay my spouse $ per month for months.151Case No. _________________________
months.
6. [ ] I should receive from my spouse $ per month for [ ] I pay spousal maintenance ordered for another marriage.
Separate Property: I believe the following property is my sole and separate property (describe):
7. Community Liens on Separate Property: sole and separate property of my spouse:
I believe I have a community interest in the following
8. Community Property. I want to divide all of the community property (except tangible personal
property) as follows:
Directions:
Column 1: List short description of each item or real and personal property.
Column 2: List your estimate of the fair market value of each item of property. List the loan
or encumbrance amount(s) on the line directly below its value.
Column 3: List the amount of net value of each item you propose for Husband.
Column 4: List the amount of net value of each item you propose for Wife.
1. Real Property
Property Description
2. Fair Market Value
(Less Encumbrances)
3. Proposed for
Husband
4. Proposed for
Wife
$ $ $
Personal Property
Property Description
(e.g. stocks, bonds, life insurance, etc.)
Pensions including Survivor Benefits
152Case No. _________________________
IRAs, Roth IRAs
Vehicle(s)
Boat(s)
9. Tangible Personal Property. I believe that the value of the tangible personal property (household
furniture, furnishings, jewelry etc.) in the possession of each party is as follows:
Husband has tangible personal property in his possession valued at approximately $
Wife has tangible personal property in her possession valued at approximately $
My preference to divide the tangible personal property is to (list your order of preference 1 – 4
with 1 being most important and 4 being the least):
Each party should keep the tangible personal property currently in his/her
possession with the exception of the following items I want from my spouse:
An equalization payment/credit should be made based upon the above values so
each of us gets the same value.
We should make a list of all the tangible personal property and alternately select
items from the list until all the property is divided.
One of us should make two (2) lists of tangible personal property both equal in
value, and the other one be awarded all property on the list of his or her choice.
Other:
153Case No. _________________________
10. Debts: The community debts should be divided as follows (complete in detail):
[ ] All of the debt should be paid % by Husband and [ ] Each of us should pay the following debts and amounts:
% by Wife; or
Amount To Be Paid
By Husband
Amount To Be
Paid By Wife
Creditor Total Amount
$ $ $
$ $ $
$ $ $
$ $ $
$ $ $
11. days.
12. Attorney’s Fees: If the case is settled today, I want the court to order (choose one):
[ ] Each of us is to pay his/her own attorney’s fees and costs.
[ ] My spouse should pay $ of my attorney’s fees and costs within [ ] I should pay $ to my spouse for attorney’s fees and costs within Name Change: I want to be restored to my former name of (List full name you want restored):
days
13. Other Issues: Briefly state the other issues that you believe must be resolved to fully settle this
case:
14. Settlement: I verify that the above statements are true upon my best information and belief and I
am willing to settle and resolve this case based upon the information provided above. I will be
prepared to show documentation to support my position at the time of the conference or hearing.
Date Signature of [ ] Husband [ ] Wife
[ ] Attorney for [ ] Husband [ ] Wife
154FORM 5: PROPOSED PATERNITY RESOLUTION STATEMENT
Name:
Mailing Address:
City, State, Zip Code:
Daytime Phone Number:
Evening Phone Number:
Representing: State Bar Number:
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
[ ] Self [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
Petitioner/Plaintiff
Case No.
ATLAS No.
Respondent/Defendant PROPOSED PATERNITY RESOLUTION
STATEMENT OF:
[ ] FATHER
[ ] MOTHER
The undersigned party provides the following specific positions on each of the issues in this case (BE
SPECIFIC):
1. IV-D Case:
[ ] 2. I receive or have received public assistance that may include AFDC, TANF, or AHCCCS
for my children or me.
[ ] I have a case with the Division of Child Support Enforcement.
Custody: The other parent and I have the following natural or adopted children in common:
Child(ren)’s Name(s) Date of Birth Age
County Guidelines for reasonable parenting time.
I want the child[ren] to live primarily with [ ] Mother [ ] Father and have parenting time with
[ ] Mother [ ] Father as follows (check all that apply):
[ ] [ ] In accordance with Every other weekend from:
at a.m./p.m. to
at a.m./p.m.
[ ] One-half of the holidays on an alternating basis.
[ ] For weeks in the summer from to (inclusive).
[ ] Spring Break from school.
[ ] Other:
1553. 4. 5. 6. 7. Case No. _________________________
[ ] Mother [ ] Father [ ] Both parents should make the decisions about the child(ren), such
as schools, doctors, etc.
This should be a [ ] sole custody [ ] joint custody arrangement.
Child Support: My position on the financial factors necessary to calculate child support under
the statewide child support guidelines is as follows (complete in full):
Father’s Gross Monthly Income: $________________
Mother’s Gross Monthly Income: $________________
[ ] Father has other child(ren) not listed above who live(s) in his household.
[ ] Father has other child(ren) not listed above for whom he pays court-ordered child
support in the amount of $ per month.
[ ] [ ] Mother has other child(ren) not listed above who live(s) in her household.
Mother has other child(ren) not listed above for whom she pays court-ordered
child support in the amount of $ per month.
[ ] Medical Insurance should be paid by [ ] Mother [ ] Father. The monthly cost for the
child(ren) is $ .
[ ] Monthly Child Care Costs for child[ren] is $ .
[ ] Extra Education Expenses or Extraordinary Child Adjustments: I believe the court
should add the following to the child support calculation (leave blank if none claimed):
Description Monthly Amount
$
$
$
[ ] Uninsured Medical Expenses should be paid:
[ ] Pro rata based upon each party’s income as provided in the guidelines; or
[ ] Other: % paid by Father and % paid by Mother.
[ ] Tax Exemptions for the child[ren] should be divided (check one):
[ ] Pro rata based upon each party’s income as provided in the guidelines; or
[ ] Other:
[ ] [ ] [ ] [ ] Past Support should be paid by [ ] Mother [ ] Father for the period of
through in the amount of $ .
Direct payments for support have been [ ] received by me [ ] paid by me for the period
of through in the amount of $ .
Past Medical Expenses have been incurred by me (and not reimbursed by insurance) for
the period of through in the amount of $
and the other parent should be ordered to reimburse me for % of those expenses.
Expenses for pregnancy, childbirth, and genetic testing have been incurred by me (and
not reimbursed by insurance) in the amount of $ and the other parent should
be ordered to reimburse me for % of those expenses.
156Case No. _________________________
8. 9. Attorneys’ Fees: If the case is settled today, I want the court to order (choose one):
[ ] [ ] [ ] Each party to pay his or her own attorneys’ fees and costs.
Mother to pay $ of my attorneys’ fees and costs within days.
Father to pay $ to other party for attorneys’ fees and costs within ____days.
Name Change: I want the child(ren)’s names to be changed as follows:
10. Other Issues: Briefly state the other issues that you believe must be resolved to fully settle this
case:
11. Settlement: I verify that the above statements are true upon my best information and belief and I
am willing to settle and resolve this case based upon the information provided above. I will be
prepared to show documentation to support my position at the time of the conference or hearing.
Date Signature of [ ] Mother [ ] Father
157FORM 6: JOINT ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION STATEMENT TO THE COURT
Name:
Mailing Address:
City, State, Zip Code:
Daytime Phone Number:
Evening Phone Number:
Representing: State Bar Number:
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
[ ] Self [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
Petitioner/Plaintiff
Case No.
ATLAS No.
Respondent/Defendant JOINT ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE
RESOLUTION STATEMENT TO THE
COURT
Pursuant to the Arizona Rules of Family Law Procedure, we hereby state the following, under penalty of
perjury:
1. [ ] The parties agree to participate in the following Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
process and:
a. have selected the following ADR process:
[ ] Arbitration
[ ] Mediation
[ ] Settlement Conference
[ ] Other:
b. [ ] The parties will use a private provider OR
[ ] The parties request a program provided through the court.
c. The person or company providing the ADR service is:
2. d. The parties expect to complete the ADR process by , .
[ ] The parties have been unable to agree on an ADR process.
[ ] The [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent believe(s) that the following ADR process would
be appropriate:
[ ] The [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent request(s) a conference to discuss ADR.
[ ] The [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent believe(s) that an ADR process would not be
appropriate for the following reason:
Date Petitioner
Date Respondent
158FORM 7: UNIFORM FAMILY LAW INTERROGATORIES
UNIFORM FAMILY LAW INTERROGATORIES
BACKGROUND AND PERSONAL HISTORY
1. NAME AND CONTACT INFORMATION
State your full name, current residence, telephone number, social security number, and date of birth; any
names by which you have been known in the past; and, for any other person residing in your household,
the full name, current residence, telephone number, social security number, date of birth, and any names
by which that person has been known in the past.
2. EDUCATION AND TRAINING
Please provide the extent of your education, course of study, degrees obtained, and when obtained.
3. EMPLOYMENT
a. State the name and address of each employer you have had during the last 3 years, and list your
job title at each such employment. If you have been self-employed at any time during those 3 years,
so state and give months and years.
b. State the gross monthly income from each employer or source of income named in paragraph a.
c. State the monthly net take home from your current employment.
d. Have you engaged in any part-time employment in addition to your regular occupation within the
past 3 years? (Y/N) ______. If so, please state whether you are still engaged in this part-time
employment and state your monthly income from this employment.
e. Have you received overtime pay, commissions or bonuses within the last 3 years? (Y/N) ______.
If yes, please state below the monthly gross amount you have earned from overtime pay and the
dollar amount of each commission and/or bonus received.
f. Attach your 6 most recent payroll stubs and your contract of employment.
4. DEFERRED COMPENSATION AND RETIREMENT BENEFITS
Are you or have you ever been a participant in a retirement plan (such as a pension, deferred
compensation, profit-sharing, stock, investment, thrift savings, § 401(K), OR military retirement plan),
hereinafter referred to as “plan” or are you or have you ever received disability pay? (Y/N) ______. If
yes:
a. b. c. Describe the nature of each plan.
Indicate whether each plan is qualified with the IRS.
State the name of the plan and the name and address of the trustee and the plan administrator.
159Case No. _________________________
d. State the date you began the employment that permitted you to participate in the plan and the
number of years and months in which you have participated and are entitled to credit.
e. State the value of your interest as of the last valuation date and state that date.
f. Attach a copy of your current plan and your most recent plan statement.
g. State whether there is a survivor benefit available on the plan. If so, state who is named the
survivor of the plan.
5. HEALTH INSURANCE
a. Do you have health insurance through your present employer? (Y/N) ______. If so, indicate what
conversion benefits are available to your spouse at the time of the dissolution of marriage, and
indicate the persons presently covered and the cost for dependent coverage, if any. Attach a copy of
your current health plan.
b. Provide documentation from your employer that sets forth the following:
1. Cost to insure yourself only, if there is a cost;
2. Cost to insure your spouse; and
3. Cost to insure your child or children.
6. OTHER INCOME
Do you have any sources of income other than as described in Interrogatory No. 3? (Y/N) ______. If so,
state each source of income and the amount received from each source in this year and in each of the last
3 calendar years. Attach a copy of each document showing each additional source of income.
7. LIFE INSURANCE
Do you presently own or have an interest in any life insurance or annuity policy? (Y/N) ______. If so,
for each policy, please state:
a. The name and address of the insurance company.
b. The type of policy, i.e., term, straight life, universal, whole life, tax deferred annuity or other.
c. Whether that insurance is connected with your employment.
d. The amount and date of each loan taken on the policy.
e. The present cash surrender value of the policy, if any.
f. Cost to you, if any, on an annual basis.
g. The name of each beneficiary.
160Case No. _________________________
h. Attach a copy of each insurance policy.
i. Attach a copy of any beneficiary designation change made by you within the last 12 months.
8. EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS
Do you receive or do you expect to receive or have you received in the past calendar year, any
employment related benefits, such as a vehicle or vehicle allowance, stock options, pension or profit-
sharing payments, vacation pay or expense account payments or reimbursements? (Y/N) ______. If so,
specify the benefits you receive or received.
9. CHILD CUSTODY
a. Do you believe that you and your spouse can reach an agreement concerning custody and
parenting time without the intervention of the court or conciliation services?
b. How do you want to share parenting time between parents?
1. How do you want to divide the week?
2. How do you want to divide holidays?
3. How do you want to divide summer or other school recesses?
c. How do you propose making the following decisions regarding your child(ren)?
1. Physical/ Medical matters.
2. Psychological/ Psychiatric matters.
3. Legal matters.
4. Religious matters.
5. Educational matters.
6. Activities and/or sports.
d. Is there a child of the marital relationship with special needs, disabilities, psychological,
psychiatric or other developmental handicaps? (Y/N) ______.
1. 2. What are the child’s special needs?
What are the extraordinary expenses associated with caring for this child?
3. Is this child over the age of 18?
e. What, if any, concerns do you have about the other parent’s parenting skills?
f. For each answer you provided above, list each and every fact supporting your position.161Case No. _________________________
10. CHILD PROTECTIVE SERVICES
Have you or has any person residing in your household ever been investigated by any agency in any
state for any reason related to abuse or neglect of children? (Y/N) ______. If yes, identify the
following:
a. State and agency investigating;
b. Date of investigation;
c. Reason for investigation, and
d. Outcome/ findings.
11. PERSONAL LIMITATIONS
Do you have any mental or physical limitations that would affect your ability to care for your minor
child/children? If yes, identify the limitations in detail.
12. DRIVING HISTORY
a. Has any jurisdiction ever revoked or suspended your driver’s license or placed you on probation?
If yes, please explain and give information regarding the following:
1. Jurisdiction;
2. Approximate date; and
3. The reason for the revocation, suspension, or probation.
b. Have you had any moving violations in the last 3 years? If yes, identify the following:
1. Jurisdiction;
2. Approximate date; and
3. Moving violations.
13. EMPLOYMENT HISTORY
Have you ever been the subject of disciplinary complaints at any place of employment? If yes, discuss
the situation.
14. CRIMINAL HISTORY
Have you or has any person residing in your household ever been investigated or arrested for any
criminal behavior? (Y/N) ______. If yes, identify the following:
a. Jurisdiction;
162Case No. _________________________
b. Approximate date; and
c. The alleged criminal behavior.
15. DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
a. Have you, your spouse, or any person residing in your household been a party to any litigation,
in any court of this state or any other state in the United States, which relates to domestic violence?
b. If so, please provide the location of the court where the action was filed; the nature of the
complaint; the disposition thereof; and the expiration date of any resultant order.
c. Have you, your spouse, or any person residing in your household been subject to an order of any
court of this state or any other state in the United States which limits or prohibits conduct or actions
because of violence or physical abuse?
d. Have there ever been allegations of child abuse, neglect, abandonment or incorrigibility filed
against you, your spouse, or any person residing in your household through child protective services
or a similar agency any law enforcement agency or any juvenile courts in any state of the United
States?
e. Please provide sufficient details regarding disposition of said allegations or investigation,
including specific dates, names of investigators and other persons involved.
f. Have you, your spouse, or any person residing in your household ever been arrested or
investigated by a law enforcement agency regarding domestic violence? If so, state when, where, by
what agency and the nature of the investigation.
16. RESIDENCE AND REAL ESTATE
Please complete the attached Real Estate Chart for each piece of real estate in which you have an
interest.
17. SOLE AND SEPARATE PROPERTY
Do you own any property that you believe is your sole and separate property? (Y/N) ______.If yes,
please:
a. Describe the property;
b. State the present location of the property;
c. State the value of your interest in the property on the date of marriage;
d. State the facts that support your belief that it is sole and separate property; and
e. Identify and attach every document in your custody, possession or control which supports your
claim that the property is separate property.
163Case No. _________________________
f. State whether you have used any community funds to improve, protect, pay for or maintain the
separate property? ______. If so, identify dates, source and amounts of funds expended and identify
any documents that show the expenditures.
18. FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
a. If you have had funds in any financial institution account this year or within the past 3 years,
please complete the attached Financial Institution Accounts Chart.
b. Do you have any money on deposit in any account, in any name other than your own? ______. If
so, for each account, please state:
1. Where the account is maintained; and
2. The name under which the account is maintained.
c. Within the past 12 months, have you transferred any assets to a third party or parties or
institution, to be held for your benefit? _____.
If so, for each account, please state
1. Where the account is maintained; and
2. The name under which the account is maintained.
d. Attach financial institution statements and a copy of each check register for each account in
which you have had funds or to which you have transferred funds to be held for your benefit for the
past 12 months.
19. SAFE DEPOSIT BOXES
a. Within the last 3 years, have you had access to any safe deposit box, safe or vault or other place
of safekeeping (hereinafter "depository")?(Y/N) ______. If so, for each depository, please state the
name of the financial institution or branch or other location where the depository is located.
b. State whether each depository is open or closed as of the date of your answers to these
interrogatories.
c. List present contents of each depository and identify any items removed within the last 3 years.
20. BUSINESS ENTITIES: CORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS, AND SOLE PROPRIETORSHIPS
a. Identify every business entity (hereinafter "business") in which you have any interest, whether
equitable or legal, and identify the type of business (corporation, general partnership, limited
partnership, joint venture, sole proprietorship).
b. With respect to each business listed, describe the type of records maintained in the last 5 years;
e.g., general ledger, general journal, cash disbursements journal, etc.
164Case No. _________________________
c. Indicate the name, address, telephone number, and employee title of each individual or business
that has possession, custody or control of the records above described.
d. Provide the name, address and telephone number of each individual or business that has
possession, custody or control of the tax returns for each business listed for the last 3 years.
e. Provide the current "net worth" of each business listed and the date that "net worth" was derived.
"Net worth" means total assets minus total liabilities. If you have an opinion, please provide the fair
market value of the business as of this date.
f. With respect to each business listed, indicate your and your spouse's interest in the business and
the name and address of every other person or entity(ies) having an interest in any such business you
have listed.
g. Attach a copy of the most recent federal tax return filed for each business listed.
21. LAW SUITS
During the last 3 years have either you or your spouse suffered an injury for which you believe you may
receive compensation or have you been a party to any lawsuit? (Y/N) ______. If so, please give details
below.
22. TAX RETURNS
Did you file federal and state income tax returns for the last 5 tax years? If so, state as to each tax year,
a. Whether it was a joint or separate return.
b. Who currently has a copy of that return?
c. Who prepared the return?
d. Attach a copy of your 5 most recent personal federal and state tax returns with all relevant
schedules, including all W-2 forms and 1099 forms.
23. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Has any financial statement, loan application, and/or credit application been prepared for you or by you
or for any business entity listed in your answer to Interrogatory No. ____ within the past 3 years?
______. If so, please state:
a. The name and address of each person, firm, corporation, partnership, mercantile or trade agency,
or other organization to whom they were issued.
b. The date of each financial statement(s), loan application(s) and/or credit application(s).
c. Attach a copy of each financial statement or application.
165Case No. _________________________
24. ATTORNEYS' FEES AND COSTS
State the terms and conditions of the employment of your attorney in this case, including the hourly rate
or other basis for fees. Give full details of any agreement or understanding between you and your
attorney in this case concerning fees and expenses, including information and specific amounts of any
payments made to your attorney, the method of payment(s) and the source of the payment(s) in
connection with this case. Attach the retainer agreement memorializing the employment of your
attorney.
25. WITNESSES AND EXHIBITS
a. Do you intend to offer in evidence at the time of trial of this case any documents? (Y/N)
______. If yes, please state in complete detail:
1. The description, subject matter, form, name and number of each and every document;
2. The relevancy, in your opinion, of each and every document to the issues before the court.
b. Unless already disclosed pursuant to Rule 53 or 85 of these rules, list each witness you intend to
call at the trial of this case, and as to each such person:
1. State that person's name, address, telephone number and the relevance of the expected
testimony to the case;
2. Give the nature and substance of each such person's expected testimony.
c. Have you employed or do you intend to employ any expert witness for purposes of supporting
any of your allegations in this litigation and/or for purposes of testifying at the trial of this action?
______. If so, unless already disclosed pursuant to Rule 53 or 85 of these rules, please state, for each
such technician or expert, the following:
1. The expert's name, or other means of identification, last known complete address and
telephone number;
2. The expert's profession, job title, or occupation and the field in which that person is an
expert;
3. Whether you intend to call the expert as a witness during the trial of this action;
4. At what address the expert is presently employed;
5. Attach a copy of each expert's resume or curriculum vitae.
26. SPOUSAL AFFIDAVITS AND INVENTORIES
If there are minor children common to the parties, please complete Form 2, Child Support Affidavit.
166Case No. _________________________
If either party is asking for spousal maintenance, attorneys’ fees or costs, or for temporary orders to
exclude a party from a residence, to divide community property or to order payment of debt, expenses or
attorneys’ fees, please complete Form 3 (Comprehensive Affidavit).
Please complete the attached inventory of securities and personal property, including vehicles, having a
value greater than $100.00, owned by you.
167Case No. _________________________
REAL ESTATE CHART
Please complete the following real estate chart for each parcel of real property in which you or your
spouse claims an interest:
Property No. 1 (address)
Legal Description
Type of Property
Date Acquired
Purchase Price
Down Payment
Original Loan Amount
Present Payoff
Additional Liens or loans
Date incurred
Original amount
Current Balance
Purpose of loan
How title is held
Your opinion of current Market Value
Property No. 2 (address)
Legal Description
Type of Property
Date Acquired
Purchase Price
Down Payment
Original Loan Amount
Present Payoff
Additional Liens or loans
Date incurred
Original amount
Current Balance
Purpose of loan
How title is held
Your opinion of current Market Value
Property No. 3 (address)
Legal Description
Type of Property
Date Acquired
Purchase Price
Down Payment
Original Loan Amount
Present Payoff
168Case No. _________________________
Additional Liens or loans
Date incurred
Original amount
Current Balance
Purpose of loan
How title is held
Your opinion of current Market Value
Property No. 4 (address)
Legal Description
Type of Property
Date Acquired
Purchase Price
Down Payment
Original Loan Amount
Present Payoff
Additional Liens or loans
Date incurred
Original amount
Current Balance
Purpose of loan
How title is held
Your opinion of current Market Value
169Case No. _________________________
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION ACCOUNT CHART
Financial institution
Name & Address
Name in which
account is held
Date opened Who can sign on
account
Balance as of
most recent
statement
SECURITIES CHART
Describe Security Date Acquired Purchase Price Present Value
170Case No. _________________________
LIST OF PROPERTY
List all items of personal property, including vehicles, and the current fair market value for each.
Item Current Value
171FORM 8: CONSENT DECREE OF DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE (DIVORCE) WITH
CHILDREN
Name:
Mailing Address:
City, State, Zip Code:
Daytime Phone Number:
Evening Phone Number:
Representing: State Bar Number:
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
[ ] Self [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
Petitioner/Plaintiff
Case No.
ATLAS No.
CONSENT DECREE OF DISSOLUTION
Respondent/Defendant OF MARRIAGE (DIVORCE) WITH
CHILDREN
THE COURT FINDS:
1. This case has come before this court for a final Decree of Dissolution of Marriage. The court has
taken all testimony needed to enter a Decree, or the court has determined testimony is not needed
to enter the Decree.
2. This court has jurisdiction over the parties under the law, the provisions of this Decree are fair
and reasonable under the circumstances and in the best interests of the minor child(ren) as to
custody, parenting time (visitation) and support, and the division of property and debt is fair and
equitable.
THE COURT FURTHER FINDS THAT:
3. 90 Day Requirement. At the time this action was filed, the Petitioner or the Respondent had
lived in Arizona for more than 90 days, or had lived in Arizona while a member of the United
States Armed Forces for more than 90 days.
4. Conciliation Court. The provisions relating to the Conciliation Court either do not apply or
have been met.
5. Irretrievably Broken. The marriage is irretrievably broken. This marriage is not a covenant
marriage.
6. Custody, Support, Spousal Maintenance/Support, Division of Property and Debt. Where it
has the legal power and where it is applicable to the facts of this case, this court has considered,
approved, and made orders relating to issues of child custody, parenting time (visitation), child
support, spousal maintenance/support (alimony), and the division of property and/or debts.
172Case No. _________________________
7. Protective Orders. Following is the effect, if any, of this Consent Decree on any existing
protective orders: ______________________________________________________________.
8. Community Property and Debt. (Select one.)
[ ] [ ] The parties did not acquire any community property or debt during the marriage, OR
The parties have agreed to a division of community property and/or debt as evidenced by
their signatures on “Exhibit A” attached to and incorporated into this Decree.
9. Pregnancy. (Select one.)
[ ] [ ] Wife is not pregnant, OR
Wife is pregnant, and the husband [ ] IS OR [ ] IS NOT the father of the child.
10. Spousal Maintenance/Support. (Select one.)
[ ] A party is entitled to an award of Spousal Maintenance/Support for the reason that
[ ] Petitioner, OR [ ] Respondent lacks enough property, including property given to
him or her as part of this divorce, to provide for his or her reasonable needs, and is unable
to support himself or herself through an appropriate job, or he or she is providing the
primary care to a child(ren) of young age or is of a condition that they should not be
required to look for work outside the home, or lacks earning ability necessary to support
himself or herself, or contributed significantly to the educational opportunities of the
other spouse, or had a marriage that lasted a long time and is of an age that may severely
limit the possibility of getting a job to support himself or herself, OR
[ ] Neither party is entitled to an award of Spousal Maintenance/Support.
If spousal maintenance is to be awarded, the parties further agree: (Select one.)
[ ] Spousal maintenance award shall be modifiable in accordance with Arizona law, OR
[ ] The parties acknowledge that the circumstances of their futures are unknown, but each
desires that this maintenance award, so awarded by their agreement, not be modifiable in
the future for any reason. Therefore, it is at this time ordered that this spousal
maintenance award shall NOT be modifiable for any reason.
11. Parent Information Program.
a. [ ] Petitioner has attended the Parent Information Program class as evidenced by the
“Certificate of Completion” in the court file. OR
[ ] Petitioner has not attended the Parent Information Program class and [ ] shall be
denied any requested relief to enforce or modify the provisions of this decree
which address custody or parenting time until Petitioner has completed the class.
b. [ ] [ ] Respondent has attended the Parent Information Program class as evidenced by
the “Certificate of Completion” in the court file. OR
Respondent has not attended the Parent Information Program class and [ ] shall
be denied any requested relief to enforce or modify the provisions of this decree
17312. 13. Case No. _________________________
which address custody or parenting time until Respondent has completed the
class.
Child Support. (Select any that apply.)
[ ] a. Child support has been determined in accordance with the Arizona Child Support
Guidelines. OR
[ ] b. Application of the Arizona Child Support Guidelines in this case is inappropriate or
unjust. The Court has considered the best interests of the child(ren) in determining that a
deviation is appropriate and makes the following findings:
The child support amount before deviation is $
The child support amount after deviation is: $
[ ] The Court finds the guidelines amount is inappropriate or unjust because:
[ ] Attached written agreement incorporated AND
[ ] All parties have signed the agreement free of duress and coercion.
[ ] Other:
[ ] [ ] c. Physical Custody Adjustment, Court Approved Discretionary Parenting Time
Adjustment or other Adjustments. (The court must make written findings if any of these
adjustments are made.) :
d. Ability to Pay. The Court finds that the person responsible for paying child support
has the ability to pay child support:
[ ] In the amount entered on Line 34 of the Worksheet of $ OR
[ ] In an adjusted amount calculated using the self-support reserve on the Parent’s
Worksheet for Child Support Amount of $ .
Custody of Minor Child(ren). (Select any that apply.)
[ ] a. Joint Custody. If joint custody is awarded the court makes the following findings:
The custody order or agreement is in the best interests of the child(ren) for the following
reasons: (List the reasons.)
Domestic Violence.
[ ] Domestic violence has not occurred during this marriage, OR
[ ] Domestic violence has occurred, but the domestic violence has not been
significant. Explain why joint custody is in the best interest of the child(ren) even
though domestic violence has occurred:
[ ] b. Supervised or No Parenting Time. (Check and complete only if supervised visitation
or no visitation is ordered.)
174Case No. _________________________
[ ] Supervised Parenting Time between the children and [ ] Petitioner OR
[ ] Respondent, is in the best interests of the child(ren), for the following reasons:
(Explain the reasons) OR
[ ] No Parenting Time by [ ] Petitioner OR [ ] Respondent, is in the best interests of
the child(ren), for the following reasons: (Explain the reasons).
THE COURT ORDERS:
1. MARRIAGE IS DISSOLVED: The marriage of the parties is dissolved and the parties are
restored to the legal status of single persons.
2. NAMES:
[ ] [ ] [ ] . (Put only the last name here.)
. (Put only the last name here.)
Wife's name is restored to Husband’s name is restored to 3. ENFORCEMENT OF TEMPORARY ORDERS:
All obligations ordered to be paid by the parties in Temporary Orders dated (fill in dates
of ALL temporary orders here)
4. [ ] are satisfied in full. OR
Judgment is awarded against the party with the obligation up to the amount due and
owing as of the date of this Decree, with the highest legal interest allowed by law, for the
total amount of $ .
CHILD CUSTODY, PARENTING TIME, AND CHILD SUPPORT:
a. PREGNANCY:
[ ] A child who is common to the parties is expected to be born this date:
[ ] All orders below as to custody, parenting time, support, and medical insurance/expenses
include this child and all other children named below. OR
[ ] The orders below as to custody, parenting time, support, and medical insurance/expenses
do not include this child; the court reserves jurisdiction to address these issues regarding
this child when the child is born.
b. CHILDREN: This Decree includes all minor children common to the parties as follows:
NAME(S) OF CHILD(REN) Date of Birth Social Security Number(s)
c. CHILD CUSTODY: (Select one.)
(1) [ ] SOLE CUSTODY: Sole custody of the minor child(ren) is awarded to:
175Case No. _________________________
[ ] Petitioner, OR [ ] Respondent, subject to parenting time as follows:
[ ] Parenting Time to the parent not having custody, according to the terms of the
Parenting Plan attached as Exhibit B and made a part of this Decree. OR,
[ ] Supervised parenting time to [ ] Petitioner OR [ ] Respondent according to the
terms of the Parenting Plan attached as Exhibit B. Parenting Time may only take
place in the presence of another person, named below or otherwise approved by
the court.
Name of supervisor:
Restrictions on parenting time:
d. e. The cost of supervised visitation will be paid by
[ ] Petitioner
[ ] Respondent
[ ] Shared equally by the parties. OR
[ ] No parenting time rights to [ ] Petitioner OR [ ] Respondent. OR,
(2) [ ] JOINT CUSTODY: Petitioner and Respondent agree to act as joint custodians of the
child(ren), as set forth in the Joint Custody Agreement/Parenting Plan by the parties,
signed by both parties and attached to this Decree as “Exhibit B.” The court adopts the
terms of the Joint Custody Agreement/Parenting Plan describing the custody and
parenting time agreement between the parties. By attaching the Joint Custody
Agreement/Parenting Plan to the Decree, the Agreement becomes part of the Decree and
carries the same legal weight as the Decree.
CHILD SUPPORT: [ ] Petitioner, OR [ ] Respondent shall pay child support to the other party
in the amount of $ per month, beginning THE FIRST DAY OF THE MONTH
following the date this Decree is signed by the judge until further order of the court. Child
Support is based on the information in the Parent’s Worksheet for Child Support Amount
attached hereto and incorporated by reference. All child support payments shall be made by
wage assignment (if applicable) through the Clerk of the Court/Clearinghouse, and must include
the statutory fee by the Order of Assignment signed this date. Payments will be in equal
installments made on the 1st and 15th of each month.
MEDICAL AND DENTAL INSURANCE, PAYMENTS, AND EXPENSES:
(1) Insurance. [ ] Petitioner, OR [ ] Respondent is ordered to provide medical and dental
insurance for the minor child(ren). Medical and dental insurance, payments and expenses are
based on the information in the Parent’s Worksheet for Child Support Amount attached
hereto and incorporated by reference. The party ordered to pay must keep the other party
informed of the insurance company name, address and telephone number, and must give the
other party the documents necessary to submit insurance claims.
(2) Non-Covered Expenses. Petitioner is ordered to pay __________ %, AND Respondent is
ordered to pay ________ % of all reasonable uncovered and/or uninsured medical, dental,
prescription, and other health care charges for the minor child(ren), including co-payments.
5. SPOUSAL MAINTENANCE/SUPPORT:
1766. Case No. _________________________
a. [ ] Neither party shall pay spousal maintenance/support (alimony) to the other party, OR
b. [ ] Petitioner OR [ ] Respondent is ordered to pay to [ ] Respondent or [ ] Petitioner the sum of
$ per month in spousal maintenance/support BEGINNING THE FIRST DAY OF
THE MONTH after this Decree is signed. Each payment shall be made by the first day of each
month after that and shall continue until [ ] the receiving party is remarried or deceased OR [ ]
until (date) . All payments shall be made through the Clerk of the Court
by wage assignment, until all required payments have been made under this Decree. Payments
made shall be included in receiving spouse’s taxable income and is tax deductible from the
paying spouse’s income as required by law. Spousal maintenance/support payments end if the
receiving party is remarried or deceased.
c. In accordance with the parties’ agreements,
[ ] The spousal maintenance award shall be modifiable in accordance with Arizona law, OR
[ ] The spousal maintenance award shall NOT be modifiable for any reason.
PROPERTY, DEBTS AND TAX RETURNS: (Select any that apply.)
a. [ ] Petitioner is ordered to pay all debts unknown to Respondent, AND
[ ] Respondent is ordered to pay all debts unknown to Petitioner, AND
[ ] Each party is ordered to pay his or her debts from the following date,
b. [ ] Other orders and relief relating to property or debt are contained in Exhibit A, which is
attached and incorporated into this Decree.
c. [ ] Each party is assigned his or her separate property and Petitioner must pay his/her separate
debt, and Respondent must pay his/her separate debt.
d. [ ] This Decree can be used as a transfer of title and can be recorded. Parties shall sign all
documents necessary to complete all transfer of title ordered in this Decree, such as motor
vehicles, houses, and financial institution accounts. The parties shall transfer all real and
personal property as described in Exhibit A to the other party on or before by
5:00 p.m.
If the party required to transfer the property has not transferred the property to the party entitled
to receive the property on or before the date and time listed above, the party entitled to receive
the property is entitled upon application to a Writ of Assistance or Writ of Execution to be issued
by the Clerk of the Court commanding the sheriff to put him or her in possession of the property.
e. [ ] For previous calendar years, pursuant to IRS rules and regulations, the parties will file:
[ ] joint federal and state income tax returns and hold each other harmless from half of all
additional income taxes if any and other costs, and each will share equally in any refunds,
OR
[ ] separate federal and state income tax returns. AND,
[ ] This calendar year and continuing thereafter, each party will file separate federal and state
income tax returns. AND,
[ ] Each party shall give the other party all necessary documentation to file all tax returns.177Case No. _________________________
7. FINANCIAL INFORMATION EXCHANGES: In cases in which child support or spousal
maintenance are ordered, then until such time as those would end under the orders in this Consent
Decree, the parties shall exchange financial information (tax returns, spousal affidavits, earning
statements and/or other related financial statements) every 24 months.
8. TAX EXEMPTION: The parties shall claim as income tax dependency exemptions on federal and
state tax returns as follows. A party required to pay child support is only entitled to claim (a)
child(ren) as an income tax dependency exemption if that parent has paid all of the child support due
and owing for the year that party is entitled to the exemption:
Parent entitled to claim Name of child Tax year
[ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
[ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
[ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
[ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
9. CHILDREN TO WHOM THIS DECREE DOES NOT APPLY: It is ordered that [ ] Petitioner,
OR [ ]Respondent has no legal obligation or right to the child(ren) born during the marriage but not
common to the marriage. These children include: (Use additional paper if necessary)
Name: Date of Birth:
Name: Date of Birth:
Child expected to be born this date:
10. QUALIFIED DOMESTIC RELATIONS ORDER (QDRO).
[ ] A QDRO is not necessary;
[ ] A QDRO is submitted herewith, OR
[ ] A QDRO will be submitted to the court as soon as practicable or not later than ______________.
The court shall retain jurisdiction over the subject matter of the QDRO.
11. FINAL APPEALABLE ORDER. Pursuant to Rule 89, Arizona Rules of Family Law Procedure,
this final judgment/decree is settled, approved and signed by the court and shall be entered by the
clerk.
12. OTHER ORDERS. (List any other orders.)
Date Judicial Officer
178Case No. _________________________
IMPORTANT. READ THIS NOTICE. Arizona law (A.R.S. § 25-503(I)) states that, with certain
exceptions, an unpaid child support order that became a judgment by operation of law (this means that it
became a judgment when it was due and unpaid) expires 3 years after the emancipation of the last
remaining un-emancipated child who was included in the court order unless it is reduced to a formal
written judgment by the court. The person who is owed child support must apply in writing to the court
to obtain a formal written judgment.
APPROVED BY:
Date Petitioner
State of Arizona )ss.
County of )
My Commission Expires:
) Sworn to or affirmed before me on:
Notary Public or Clerk of the Superior Court
If you are filing a Consent Decree, the Respondent must sign:
Date Respondent
State of Arizona ) Sworn to or affirmed before me on:
)ss.
County of )
My Commission Expires:
Notary Public or Clerk of the Superior Court
If either party is represented by an attorney, the attorney must sign:
Date Petitioner’s Attorney
Date Respondent’s Attorney
179Case No. _________________________
[ ] Appliances
[ ] VCR/DVD
EXHIBIT A: PROPERTY AND DEBTS
1a. DIVISION OF COMMUNITY PROPERTY:
[ ] The following community property is awarded to each party as follows:
1b. LIST OF COMMUNITY PROPERTY. (Be specific) AWARDED TO:
Petitioner Respondent
[ ] Household furniture/furnishings
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ]
[ ] Personal Computer [ ] [ ]
[ ] Stereo [ ] [ ]
[ ] State Income Tax [ ] [ ]
[ ] Federal Income Tax [ ] [ ]
[ ] Motor vehicle [ ] [ ]
[ ] Motor vehicle [ ] [ ]
[ ] Motor vehicle [ ] [ ]
[ ] Cash, bonds of $ [ ] [ ]
[ ] Other: [ ] [ ]
[ ] Other: [ ] [ ]
[ ] Other: [ ] [ ]
[ ] Other: [ ] [ ]
[ ] Award each party the personal property in his or her possession.
[ ] Continued on reverse side or see attached list.
1c. DIVISION OF RETIREMENT, PENSION, DEFERRED COMPENSATION WARNING. You
should see an attorney about your retirement, pension, deferred compensation, § 401k plans
and/or benefits. If you do not see an attorney regarding these assets, you risk losing any interest
you have in these plans and/or benefits. There are certain documents the plan administrator must
have. Only an attorney can help you prepare these documents.
180
[ ] TVCase No. _________________________
[ ] OR
[ ] OR
[ ] Each party is awarded his or her interest in any retirement benefits, pension plans, or
other deferred compensation described as:
Petitioner’s:
Respondent’s:
The Plan Administrator and the parties have approved the Qualified Domestic Relations
Order (QDRO) attached as Exhibit(s) . Do not check this box without first seeking the
help of an attorney.
Each party WAIVES AND GIVES UP his or her interest in any retirement benefits,
pension plan, or other deferred compensation of the other party:
[ ] Signature of Petitioner:
1d. [ ] Signature of Respondent:
OR
[ ] Neither party has a retirement, pension, deferred compensation, § 401K Plan and/or
benefits.
OR
[ ] Other: __________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________.
DIVISION OF REAL PROPERTY. Section A is for one piece of property. Section B is for
another piece of property. If you own more than 2 pieces of property, check the box below and
attach another sheet of paper with the information requested in A and B.
[ ] More than 2 pieces of property are involved. See attached sheet listing the same
information as in A and B.
A. Real property located at (address ) which is legally described as:
(You must provide the legal description. The legal description can be found on the deed
to the property. If you do not provide the legal description, you may have to come back
to court to amend the Decree to include the legal description.)
LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The real property as described above is:
[ ] Awarded to [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent as his or her sole and separate property.
OR
[ ] Shall be sold and the proceeds divided as follows:
% or $ to Petitioner.
% or $ to Respondent.181Case No. _________________________
[ ] This Decree can be used as a transfer of title and can be recorded. Parties shall
sign all documents necessary to complete all transfer of titles ordered in this
Decree, such as motor vehicles, houses, and financial institution accounts.
[ ] is appointed real estate commissioner to sell this real property.
B. Real property at (address ) which is legally described as: (You
must provide the legal description. The legal description can be found on the deed to the
property. If you do not provide the legal description, you may have to come back to
court to amend the Decree to include the legal description.)
LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
[ ] [ ] follows:
Creditor The real property as described above is:
[ ] Awarded to [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent as his or her sole and separate property.
OR
[ ] Shall be sold and the proceeds divided as follows:
% or $ to Petitioner.
% or $ to Respondent.
This Decree can be used as a transfer of title and can be recorded. Parties shall
sign all documents necessary to complete all transfer of titles ordered in this
Decree, such as motor vehicles, houses, and financial institution accounts.
is appointed real estate commissioner to sell this real property.
1e. DIVISION OF COMMUNITY DEBTS. [ ] The following community debts shall be divided as
Amount To Be Paid
Total Amount
By Husband
$ $ $
$ $ $
$ $ $
$ $ $
$ $ $
Amount To Be Paid
By Wife
[ ] Continued on reverse side or attached list.
182Case No. _________________________
[ ] Any debts or obligations incurred by either party before the Respondent was served with the
Petition for Dissolution that are not identified in the list above or attached shall be paid by the
party who incurred the debt or obligation and that party shall indemnify and hold the other party
harmless from such debts.
2a. SEPARATE PROPERTY. The following separate property is awarded as follows: (Be specific)
Description of Property. (Be specific) Confirm to
Petitioner
Confirm to
Respondent
Creditor Amount To Be Paid
By Wife
Total Amount
2b. SEPARATE DEBT. The parties are each ordered to pay his or her separate debt as follows:
Amount To Be Paid
By Husband
$ $ $
$ $ $
$ $ $
$ $ $
$ $ $
By signing this Exhibit and subscribing and swearing to same (or affirming to same) before a Notary
Public, both parties affirm that the information is true and correct, including the following:
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. NON-COVENANT MARRIAGE. We do not have a covenant marriage.
RIGHT TO TRIAL IS WAIVED. I understand that by signing this Consent Decree, I am
waiving my right to a trial before a judge.
NO DURESS OR COERCION. COMPLETE AGREEMENT. I am not under any force, threats,
duress, coercion, or undue influence from anyone, including the other party, to sign this Consent
Decree. This Decree with attachments, if any, that I have signed is our full agreement. I have
not agreed to something different from what is stated in writing in the Decree.
LEGAL ADVICE. I understand that even if I am representing myself without an attorney, I have
the right to be represented by an attorney. I have the right to call an attorney and get legal advice
before I sign this Consent Decree.
IRRETRIEVABLY BROKEN MARRIAGE. I agree that our marriage is irretrievably broken.
There is no reasonable prospect of reconciliation [or we desire to live separate and apart if this
is a Legal Separation case].
183Case No. _________________________
6. DIVISION OF PROPERTY. The agreement about division of property and debts is fair and
equitable.
SIGNATURES
SIGNATURE BY PETITIONER: best of my knowledge, information and belief.
Everything stated by me in this document is true and correct to the
Date Petitioner
State of Arizona )ss.
County of )
My Commission Expires:
) Sworn to or affirmed before me on:
Notary Public or Clerk of the Superior Court
SIGNATURE BY RESPONDENT: Everything stated by me in this Stipulation is true and correct to the
best of my knowledge, information and belief.
Date Respondent
State of Arizona ) Sworn to or affirmed before me on:
)ss.
County of )
My Commission Expires:
If either party is represented by an attorney, the attorney must sign:
Notary Public or Clerk of the Superior Court
Date Approved by Petitioner’s Attorney
Date Approved by Respondent’s Attorney
If the Attorney General is involved in this case, the Attorney General must approve the child support
amount only and sign below:
Date Child Support Amount Approved by Attorney
General
184FORM 9: PARENTING COORDINATOR’S REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Name:
Mailing Address:
City, State, Zip Code:
Daytime Phone Number:
State Bar Number (if applicable):
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
Case No.
Petitioner
PARENTING COORDINATOR’S REPORT
Respondent AND RECOMMENDATIONS
ISSUE(S):
POSITION(S) OF THE PARTIES:
OTHER INFORMATION CONSIDERED:
AGREEMENTS OF THE PARTIES:
FINDINGS:
RECOMMENDATIONS:
Date Parenting Coordinator
ORIGINAL of the foregoing filed with the Clerk of the Superior Court;
COPIES of the foregoing mailed/delivered/transmitted on: The Honorable
date.
Attorney for Respondent
By:
Attorney for Petitioner
185FORM 10: ORDER REGARDING PARENTING COORDINATOR’S REPORT AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
Case No.
Petitioner
ORDER REGARDING PARENTING
Respondent COORDINATOR’S REPORT AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on the Report and Recommendations of the Parenting Coordinator dated ___________________,
and good cause appearing,
[ ] Objection filed by
[ ] Objection not filed.
IT IS ORDERED:
[ ] The recommendations of the Parenting Coordinator are approved and adopted as an order of the
[ ] court.
The recommendations of the Parenting Coordinator are modified as follows or as set forth in a
separate order.
[ ] The recommendations of the Parenting Coordinator are rejected and the current court order is
affirmed, subject to either party requesting a hearing.
[ ] A hearing is set on , at a.m./p.m. for minutes regarding the
recommendations of the Parenting Coordinator, before .
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED:
Date Judicial Officer
186FORM 11: COORDINATORS
PARENT INFORMATION REGARDING THE USE OF PARENTING
PARENT INFORMATION REGARDING THE USE OF
PARENTING COORDINATORS
Using a Parenting Coordinator to help make recommendations to the court about your children can be a
useful alternative to repeatedly going to court.
A Parenting Coordinator is a professional appointed by the court to assist parents in resolving disputes
about parenting their children and to make recommendations to the court for orders if the parents are
unable reach a resolution.
Parents may want to hire a Parenting Coordinator when other avenues of problem resolution have not
resulted in an ability to make recommendations to the court about their children and there are continued
disagreements about such issues as schedules, overnight parenting time, choice of schools,
extracurricular activities, exchanging the children, holiday scheduling, the handling of the children's
behavior, religious training, health issues, and problematic behaviors on the part of one or both parents.
Many times, the family has already participated in a custody/access evaluation.
Parents may agree to use a Parenting Coordinator and agree to a specific person or the Court may
appoint a Parenting Coordinator and appoint a specific person to be Parenting Coordinator of the Court's
own choosing.
The amount of time required with the Parenting Coordinator or the number of meetings with the
Parenting Coordinator will be determined by the conduct of the parties. The Parenting Coordinator will
determine the actual number of meetings that are necessary for any specific issue/issues.
When a dispute is presented to the Parenting Coordinator, the coordinator may try to assist parents in
reaching a resolution. The Parenting Coordinator might want to get other information such as the
children's opinion, information from doctors, therapists, schools or other caretakers. If the parties
cannot come to an agreement, the Parenting Coordinator then makes a recommendation to the court for
an order.
If one parent is opposed to the recommendation, he or she can file an objection within 10 days and the
court can review the recommendations. The Court may accept, modify or reject the recommendations of
the Parenting Coordinator. The Court may also set the matter for hearing. In a time-sensitive situation, a
recommendation of the Parenting Coordinator may be effective immediately pending approval by the
court and without prejudice to the parties.
Hiring a Parenting Coordinator is a serious matter. A parenting coordinator is especially helpful for
families who continue to have disagreements. Parenting Coordinators are also useful for families where
parents have concerns about drugs, alcohol, abuse or the stability of the other parent. A Parenting
Coordinator may be appointed for a specific term. If the Parenting Coordinator feels that he or she
cannot be helpful to the family, the Parenting Coordinator can resign. If one parent is unhappy with the
Parenting Coordinator, that parent cannot alone discharge the Parenting Coordinator. If the Parenting
Coordinator acts in a manner that seems unprofessional, the parent should first talk with the Parenting
Coordinator about that parent’s concerns. If the parent is still unsatisfied, that parent should submit a
written statement of that parent’s concern to the two attorneys (if represented), the Parenting187Case No. __________________________
Coordinator, the child's attorney (if there is one) and to the other parent. A conference may be set to
resolve the concerns. If the concern is still not resolved after that meeting, the parent can ask the court
to have the Parenting Coordinator removed. The judge will then review the complaint and make a
decision. If the Coordinator is removed, a new Parenting Coordinator may be appointed.
The Parenting Coordinator's goals are somewhat different than those of a judge. A judge's job is to
make orders that are based on the law, including the best interests of the children. A Parenting
Coordinator's job is to assist parents in making parenting decisions in the best interests of the children
and in accordance with the parenting plan, as set forth in their decree or the current court order.
Whenever possible, a major goal is to help families develop their skills so they do not need a Parenting
Coordinator. If this can be accomplished, the power to make decisions about their children is back in
the hands of the parents.
The parents pay the fees for the services of a Parenting Coordinator as ordered by the court. Many
Parenting Coordinators request a retainer before they begin their work with a family. Before a Parenting
Coordinator is appointed, the judge will decide what portion of the fee each parent will pay.
Using a Parenting Coordinator will usually reduce the need to go to court, and, therefore, should be cost
effective. In addition, the family will usually be seen sooner by the Parenting Coordinator than the
Court, resulting in quicker decisions.
188FORM 12: Name:
Mailing Address:
City, State, Zip Code:
Daytime Phone Number:
Evening Phone Number:
Representing: State Bar Number:
INVENTORY OF PROPERTY AND DEBTS
[ ] Self [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
Case No.
Petitioner/Plaintiff
ATLAS No.
INVENTORY OF PROPERTY AND DEBTS
Respondent/Defendant
I. PROPERTY
List all property acquired during your marriage in which you or your spouse claims to have a
community interest. If there is a dispute as to whether there is a community interest or obligation,
indicate in “Contested Column.” Value of the property is the current fair market values. Minus any
liens. If you need additional room, add a separate sheet of paper.
Description Date
Acquired
Value Contested
Position
Proposed
allocation
[H or W]
A. Financial institution Accounts: Cash and deposit accounts: Savings, Checking, Credit Union,
Money Market, etc. Include financial institution's name, branch and account number.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
B. Investments: Stocks, Bonds, Notes, Certificates of Deposit, Mortgages, Deeds of Trust, etc.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
189Case No. _________________________
Description Date Acquired Value Contested
Position
Proposed
allocation [H or
W]
C. Life Insurance: Company name, owner, policy number, insured, face amount and beneficiary
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
D. Retirement Plans: Pension, profit-sharing, 401(k), Deferred Compensation
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
E. Real Property
22.
23.
24.
25.
F. Business Interests: Corporations, Partnerships, Limited Liability Corporations, Joint Ventures,
Proprietorships
26.
27.
28.
29.
G. Vehicles: Cars, Motorcycles, Motor Homes, Boats, Trailers, etc.
30.
31.
32.
190Case No. _________________________
33.
34.
35.
H. Personal Property over $100 in Value: Household goods, personal effects, antiques, objects of
intrinsic value
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
191Case No. _________________________
61.
62.
63.
I. Miscellaneous Assets
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
II. DEBTS
List all debts and installment payments you currently owe. Follow the format below. Use additional
paper if necessary.
Creditor Name Purpose of
Debt
Unpaid
Balance
Min.
Monthly
Payment
Date of
last
Payment
Contested
Position
Proposed
Allocation
[H or W]
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
192Case No. _________________________
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Date Signature of Party or Attorney
193FORM 13: Name:
Mailing Address:
City, State, Zip Code:
Daytime Phone Number:
Evening Phone Number:
Representing: State Bar Number:
ORDER TO APPEAR; TEMPORARY ORDERS
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
[ ] Self [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
Petitioner/Plaintiff
Case No.
ATLAS No.
ORDER TO APPEAR
Respondent/Defendant TEMPORARY ORDERS
READ ME: This is an important Court Order that affects your rights. Read this Order carefully. If you
do not understand this Order, contact a lawyer for help.
All parties, whether represented by attorneys or not, must be present. If there is a failure to appear, the
court may make such orders as are just, including granting the relief requested by the party who does
appear.
Based on documents filed and pursuant to Arizona Law,
IT IS ORDERED THAT YOU appear at the time and place stated below so the
court can determine whether the relief asked for in the Petition or Motion should be granted.
INFORMATION ABOUT COURT HEARING TO BE HELD:
NAME OF JUDICIAL OFFICER:
DATE AND TIME OF HEARING:
PLACE OF HEARING:
TYPE OF HEARING: [ ] Resolution Management Conference
[ ] Evidentiary Hearing
[ ] Other (specify):
TIME ALLOTTED FOR HEARING:
EVIDENCE [ ] WILL or [ ] WILL NOT be presented at the hearing.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that a true copy of this “Order to Appear - Temporary Orders” and a true
copy of the documents filed with the Petition shall be served by the moving party on the parties who are
194Case No. _________________________
required to appear and a true copy of these documents shall be mailed immediately to parties who have
appeared in this action, in accordance with Arizona Rules of Family Law Procedure, Rule 43.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the parties and counsel shall meet and confer, comply with the
disclosure requirements of Rule 49, and submit a written Resolution Statement as prescribed by Rule 98,
Form 4 or 5 as applicable, not less than five days prior to the date set for the Resolution Management
Conference or evidentiary hearing. At least three days prior to an evidentiary hearing, the parties shall
exchange any exhibits to be offered at the hearing, and a list of the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of all witnesses who may testify.
Requests for reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities must be made to the office of the
Judge or Commissioner scheduled to hear this case five days before your scheduled court date.
Date Judicial Officer
195FORM 14: ORDER TO APPEAR POST JUDGMENT/DECREE
Name:
Mailing Address:
City, State, Zip Code:
Daytime Phone Number:
Evening Phone Number:
Representing: State Bar Number:
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
[ ] Self [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
Petitioner/Plaintiff
Case No.
ATLAS No.
ORDER TO APPEAR
Respondent/Defendant POST JUDGMENT/DECREE
READ THIS NOTICE: This is an important Court Order that affects your rights. Read this Order
carefully. If you do not understand this Order, contact a lawyer for help.
All parties, whether represented by attorneys or not, must be present. If there is a failure to appear, the
court may make such orders as are just, including granting the relief requested by the party who does
appear.
Based on documents filed and pursuant to Arizona Law,
IT IS ORDERED THAT YOU appear at the time
and place stated below so the court can determine whether the relief asked for in the Petition should be
granted.
INFORMATION ABOUT COURT HEARING TO BE HELD:
NAME OF JUDICIAL OFFICER:
DATE AND TIME OF HEARING:
PLACE OF HEARING:
TYPE OF HEARING: [ ] return hearing [ ] oral argument [ ] mediation conference
[ ] other (specify):
TIME ALLOTTED FOR HEARING:
EVIDENCE [ ] WILL or [ ] WILL NOT be presented at the hearing.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that a true copy of this “Order to Appear – Post Judgment/Decree” and a
true copy of the documents filed with the Petition shall be served by the moving party on the parties who
are required to appear and a true copy of these documents shall be mailed immediately to parties who
[ ] evidentiary hearing
[ ] post-decree or post-judgment
196Case No. _________________________
have appeared in this action, in accordance with Arizona Rules of Family Law Procedure, Rules 40, 41,
42 and 43.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the parties and counsel file and exchange all documents and
disclosure as prescribed by Rule 92, within the time specified therein. Failure to comply may result in
the imposition of sanctions as set forth in Rule 92(M).
Requests for reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities must be made to the office of the
Judge or Commissioner scheduled to hear this case five days before your scheduled court date.
Date Judicial Officer
197FORM 15: REQUEST FOR PROTECTED ADDRESS AND ORDER FOR PROTECTED ADDRESS
Name:
[ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
ADDRESS PROTECTED
ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
Petitioner/Plaintiff
Case No.
ATLAS No.
REQUEST FOR PROTECTED ADDRESS
Respondent/Defendant
I request the court to order that my address be protected from public disclosure, including disclosure to
the opposing party(ies) in this case.
I reasonably believe that physical or emotional harm may result to me or my minor child(ren) if the my
address is not protected from disclosure, for the following reasons:
[ ] I have a valid Order of Protection in place issued by the following court:
OR
[ ] Other reasons briefly described below:
I have listed my address on a separate sheet of paper for court use.
I understand that I have a continuing duty to provide the clerk of the court with a current and correct
mailing address where I can be served with process until one of the following events stated in Rule 7(D),
Arizona Rules of Family Law Procedure occurs.
Date Requester’s Signature
PERSON WHOSE ADDRESS IS PROTECTED:
[ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent
198Case No. _________________________
ADDRESS TO BE PROTECTED:
Street:
City:
State, Zip Code:
Telephone Number:
199ARIZONA SUPERIOR COURT, COUNTY OF
Petitioner/Plaintiff
Case No.
ATLAS No.
ORDER FOR PROTECTED ADDRESS
Respondent/Defendant
Upon Request of [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent, and good cause appearing,
IT IS ORDERED that:
The address of [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent shall be protected from public disclosure until further
order of this court.
The Clerk of the Court shall protect the address of [ ] Petitioner [ ] Respondent from public disclosure
until further order of this court.
The Clerk and the parties hereto shall comply with the requirements of Rule 7, A.R.C.P.
[Alternative language (quoting Rule 7): Any person required under these rules to serve a response or
other document upon a person whose address is ordered protected from disclosure under this rule may
serve the same by delivering true and correct copies of the documents to be served, together with the
proper fee established by administrative order to cover the cost of service, to the clerk of the court. The
clerk shall promptly mail the documents by regular first-class mail to the most recent protected address
provided to the clerk, and service shall be deemed complete upon mailing. The clerk shall promptly file
a written statement verifying the documents that were mailed and the date of mailing to the protected
address signed by the clerk or deputy clerk who mailed the documents. All documents mailed to a
protected address shall bear the clerk’s return address, and a notation of any process returned as
undelivered shall be made in the court file.]
Date Judicial Officer
200