Code Sections
Family Code Sections
3011. In making a determination of the best interest of the child
in a proceeding described in Section 3021, the court shall, among any
other factors it finds relevant, consider all of the following:
(a) The health, safety, and welfare of the child.
(b) Any history of abuse by one parent or any other person seeking
custody against any of the following:
(1) Any child to whom he or she is related by blood or affinity or
with whom he or she has had a caretaking relationship, no matter how
temporary.
(2) The other parent.
(3) A parent, current spouse, or cohabitant, of the parent or
person seeking custody, or a person with whom the parent or person
seeking custody has a dating or engagement relationship.
As a prerequisite to considering allegations of abuse, the court
may require substantial independent corroboration, including, but not
limited to, written reports by law enforcement agencies, child
protective services or other social welfare agencies, courts, medical
facilities, or other public agencies or private nonprofit
organizations providing services to victims of sexual assault or
domestic violence. As used in this subdivision, "abuse against a
child" means "child abuse" as defined in Section 11165.6 of the Penal
Code and abuse against any of the other persons described in
paragraph (2) or (3) means "abuse" as defined in Section 6203 of this
code.
(c) The nature and amount of contact with both parents, except as
provided in Section 3046.
(d) The habitual or continual illegal use of controlled
substances, the habitual or continual abuse of alcohol, or the
habitual or continual abuse of prescribed controlled substances by
either parent. Before considering these allegations, the court may
first require independent corroboration, including, but not limited
to, written reports from law enforcement agencies, courts, probation
departments, social welfare agencies, medical facilities,
rehabilitation facilities, or other public agencies or nonprofit
organizations providing drug and alcohol abuse services. As used in
this subdivision, "controlled substances" has the same meaning as
defined in the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Division
10 (commencing with Section 11000) of the Health and Safety Code.
(e) (1) Where allegations about a parent pursuant to subdivision
(b) or (d) have been brought to the attention of the court in the
current proceeding, and the court makes an order for sole or joint
custody to that parent, the court shall state its reasons in writing
or on the record. In these circumstances, the court shall ensure that
any order regarding custody or visitation is specific as to time,
day, place, and manner of transfer of the child as set forth in
subdivision (b) of Section 6323.
(2) The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply if the
parties stipulate in writing or on the record regarding custody or
visitation.3027. (a) If allegations of child abuse, including child sexual
abuse, are made during a child custody proceeding and the court has
concerns regarding the child's safety, the court may take any
reasonable, temporary steps as the court, in its discretion, deems
appropriate under the circumstances to protect the child's safety
until an investigation can be completed. Nothing in this section
shall affect the applicability of Section 16504 or 16506 of the
Welfare and Institutions Code.
(b) If allegations of child abuse, including child sexual abuse,
are made during a child custody proceeding, the court may request
that the local child welfare services agency conduct an investigation
of the allegations pursuant to Section 328 of the Welfare and
Institutions Code. Upon completion of the investigation, the agency
shall report its findings to the court.
3044. (a) Upon a finding by the court that a party seeking custody
of a child has perpetrated domestic violence against the other party
seeking custody of the child or against the child or the child's
siblings within the previous five years, there is a rebuttable
presumption that an award of sole or joint physical or legal custody
of a child to a person who has perpetrated domestic violence is
detrimental to the best interest of the child, pursuant to Section
3011. This presumption may only be rebutted by a preponderance of the
evidence.
(b) In determining whether the presumption set forth in
subdivision (a) has been overcome, the court shall consider all of
the following factors:
(1) Whether the perpetrator of domestic violence has demonstrated
that giving sole or joint physical or legal custody of a child to the
perpetrator is in the best interest of the child. In determining the
best interest of the child, the preference for frequent and
continuing contact with both parents, as set forth in subdivision (b)
of Section 3020, or with the noncustodial parent, as set forth in
paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of Section 3040, may not be used to
rebut the presumption, in whole or in part.
(2) Whether the perpetrator has successfully completed a batterer'
s treatment program that meets the criteria outlined in subdivision
(c) of Section 1203.097 of the Penal Code.
(3) Whether the perpetrator has successfully completed a program
of alcohol or drug abuse counseling if the court determines that
counseling is appropriate.
(4) Whether the perpetrator has successfully completed a parenting
class if the court determines the class to be appropriate.
(5) Whether the perpetrator is on probation or parole, and whether
he or she has complied with the terms and conditions of probation or
parole.
(6) Whether the perpetrator is restrained by a protective order or
restraining order, and whether he or she has complied with its terms
and conditions.
(7) Whether the perpetrator of domestic violence has committed any
further acts of domestic violence.
(c) For purposes of this section, a person has "perpetrated
domestic violence" when he or she is found by the court to have
intentionally or recklessly caused or attempted to cause bodily
injury, or sexual assault, or to have placed a person in reasonable
apprehension of imminent serious bodily injury to that person or toanother, or to have engaged in any behavior involving, but not
limited to, threatening, striking, harassing, destroying personal
property or disturbing the peace of another, for which a court may
issue an ex parte order pursuant to Section 6320 to protect the other
party seeking custody of the child or to protect the child and the
child's siblings.
(d) (1) For purposes of this section, the requirement of a finding
by the court shall be satisfied by, among other things, and not
limited to, evidence that a party seeking custody has been convicted
within the previous five years, after a trial or a plea of guilty or
no contest, of any crime against the other party that comes within
the definition of domestic violence contained in Section 6211 and of
abuse contained in Section 6203, including, but not limited to, a
crime described in subdivision (e) of Section 243 of, or Section 261,
262, 273.5, 422, or 646.9 of, the Penal Code.
(2) The requirement of a finding by the court shall also be
satisfied if any court, whether that court hears or has heard the
child custody proceedings or not, has made a finding pursuant to
subdivision (a) based on conduct occurring within the previous five
years.
(e) When a court makes a finding that a party has perpetrated
domestic violence, the court may not base its findings solely on
conclusions reached by a child custody evaluator or on the
recommendation of the Family Court Services staff, but shall consider
any relevant, admissible evidence submitted by the parties.
(f) In any custody or restraining order proceeding in which a
party has alleged that the other party has perpetrated domestic
violence in accordance with the terms of this section, the court
shall inform the parties of the existence of this section and shall
give them a copy of this section prior to any custody mediation in
the case.
4320. In ordering spousal support under this part, the court shall
consider all of the following circumstances:
(a) The extent to which the earning capacity of each party is
sufficient to maintain the standard of living established during the
marriage, taking into account all of the following:
(1) The marketable skills of the supported party; the job market
for those skills; the time and expenses required for the supported
party to acquire the appropriate education or training to develop
those skills; and the possible need for retraining or education to
acquire other, more marketable skills or employment.
(2) The extent to which the supported party's present or future
earning capacity is impaired by periods of unemployment that were
incurred during the marriage to permit the supported party to devote
time to domestic duties.
(b) The extent to which the supported party contributed to the
attainment of an education, training, a career position, or a license
by the supporting party.
(c) The ability of the supporting party to pay spousal support,
taking into account the supporting party's earning capacity, earned
and unearned income, assets, and standard of living.
(d) The needs of each party based on the standard of living
established during the marriage.
(e) The obligations and assets, including the separate property,
of each party.(f) The duration of the marriage.
(g) The ability of the supported party to engage in gainful
employment without unduly interfering with the interests of dependent
children in the custody of the party.
(h) The age and health of the parties.
(i) Documented evidence of any history of domestic violence, as
defined in Section 6211, between the parties or perpetrated by either
party against either party's child, including, but not limited to,
consideration of emotional distress resulting from domestic violence
perpetrated against the supported party by the supporting party, and
consideration of any history of violence against the supporting party
by the supported party.
(j) The immediate and specific tax consequences to each party.
(k) The balance of the hardships to each party.
(l) The goal that the supported party shall be self-supporting
within a reasonable period of time. Except in the case of a marriage
of long duration as described in Section 4336, a "reasonable period
of time" for purposes of this section generally shall be one-half the
length of the marriage. However, nothing in this section is intended
to limit the court's discretion to order support for a greater or
lesser length of time, based on any of the other factors listed in
this section, Section 4336, and the circumstances of the parties.
(m) The criminal conviction of an abusive spouse shall be
considered in making a reduction or elimination of a spousal support
award in accordance with Section 4324.5 or 4325.
(n) Any other factors the court determines are just and equitable.
6306. (a) Prior to a hearing on the issuance or denial of an order
under this part, the court shall ensure that a search is or has been
conducted to determine if the subject of the proposed order has any
prior criminal conviction for a violent felony specified in Section
667.5 of the Penal Code or a serious felony specified in Section
1192.7 of the Penal Code; has any misdemeanor conviction involving
domestic violence, weapons, or other violence; has any outstanding
warrant; is currently on parole or probation; has a registered
firearm; or has any prior restraining order or any violation of a
prior restraining order. The search shall be conducted of all records
and databases readily available and reasonably accessible to the
court, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) The California Sex and Arson Registry (CSAR).
(2) The Supervised Release File.
(3) State summary criminal history information maintained by the
Department of Justice pursuant to Section 11105 of the Penal Code.
(4) The Federal Bureau of Investigation's nationwide database.
(5) Locally maintained criminal history records or databases.
However, a record or database need not be searched if the
information available in that record or database can be obtained as a
result of a search conducted in another record or database.
(b) (1) Prior to deciding whether to issue an order under this
part or when determining appropriate temporary custody and visitation
orders, the court shall consider the following information obtained
pursuant to a search conducted under subdivision (a): any conviction
for a violent felony specified in Section 667.5 of the Penal Code or
a serious felony specified in Section 1192.7 of the Penal Code; any
misdemeanor conviction involving domestic violence, weapons, or other
violence; any outstanding warrant; parole or probation status; anyprior restraining order; and any violation of a prior restraining
order.
(2) Information obtained as a result of the search that does not
involve a conviction described in this subdivision shall not be
considered by the court in making a determination regarding the
issuance of an order pursuant to this part. That information shall be
destroyed and shall not become part of the public file in this or
any other civil proceeding.
(c) (1) After issuing its ruling, the court shall advise the
parties that they may request the information described in
subdivision (b) upon which the court relied. The court shall admonish
the party seeking the proposed order that it is unlawful, pursuant
to Sections 11142 and 13303 of the Penal Code, to willfully release
the information, except as authorized by law.
(2) Upon the request of either party to obtain the information
described in subdivision (b) upon which the court relied, the court
shall release the information to the parties or, upon either party's
request, to his or her attorney in that proceeding.
(3) The party seeking the proposed order may release the
information to his or her counsel, court personnel, and
court-appointed mediators for the purpose of seeking judicial review
of the court's order or for purposes of court proceedings under
Section 213.5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(d) Any information obtained as a result of the search conducted
pursuant to subdivision (a) and relied upon by the court shall be
maintained in a confidential case file and shall not become part of
the public file in the proceeding or any other civil proceeding.
However, the contents of the confidential case file shall be
disclosed to the court-appointed mediator assigned to the case or to
a child custody evaluator appointed by the court pursuant to Section
3111 of the Family Code or Section 730 of the Evidence Code. All
court-appointed mediators and child custody evaluators appointed or
contracted by the court pursuant to Section 3111 of the Family Code
or Section 730 of the Evidence Code who may receive information from
the search conducted pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be subject to,
and shall comply with, the California Law Enforcement
Telecommunications System policies, practices, and procedures adopted
pursuant to Section 15160 of the Government Code.
(e) If the results of the search conducted pursuant to subdivision
(a) indicate that an outstanding warrant exists against the subject
of the order, the court shall order the clerk of the court to
immediately notify, by the most effective means available,
appropriate law enforcement officials of the issuance and contents of
any protective order and of any other information obtained through
the search that the court determines is appropriate. The law
enforcement officials so notified shall take all actions necessary to
execute any outstanding warrants or any other actions, with respect
to the restrained person, as appropriate and as soon as practicable.
(f) If the results of the search conducted pursuant to subdivision
(a) indicate that the subject of the order is currently on parole or
probation, the court shall order the clerk of the court to
immediately notify, by the most effective means available, the
appropriate parole or probation officer of the issuance and contents
of any protective order issued by the court and of any other
information obtained through the search that the court determines is
appropriate. That officer shall take all actions necessary to revoke
any parole or probation, or any other actions, with respect to therestrained person, as appropriate and as soon as practicable.
(g) Nothing in this section shall delay the granting of an
application for an order that may otherwise be granted without the
information resulting from the database search. If the court finds
that a protective order under this part should be granted on the
basis of the affidavit presented with the petition, the court shall
issue the protective order and shall then ensure that a search is
conducted pursuant to subdivision (a) prior to the hearing.Welfare and Institutions Code Sections
204. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, except provisions
of law governing the retention and storage of data, a family law
court and a court hearing a probate guardianship matter shall, upon
request from the juvenile court in any county, provide to the court
all available information the court deems necessary to make a
determination regarding the best interest of a child, as described in
Section 202, who is the subject of a proceeding before the juvenile
court pursuant to this division. The information shall also be
released to a child protective services worker or juvenile probation
officer acting within the scope of his or her duties in that
proceeding. Any information released pursuant to this section that is
confidential pursuant to any other provision of law shall remain
confidential and may not be released, except to the extent necessary
to comply with this section. No records shared pursuant to this
section may be disclosed to any party in a case unless the party
requests the agency or court that originates the record to release
these records and the request is granted. In counties that provide
confidential family law mediation, or confidential dependency
mediation, those mediations are not covered by this section.
213.5. (a) After a petition has been filed pursuant to Section 311
to declare a child a dependent child of the juvenile court, and until
the time that the petition is dismissed or dependency is terminated,
upon application in the manner provided by Section 527 of the Code
of Civil Procedure or in the manner provided by Section 6300 of the
Family Code, if related to domestic violence, the juvenile court has
exclusive jurisdiction to issue ex parte orders (1) enjoining any
person from molesting, attacking, striking, stalking, threatening,
sexually assaulting, battering, harassing, telephoning, including,
but not limited to, making annoying telephone calls as described in
Section 653m of the Penal Code, destroying the personal property,
contacting, either directly or indirectly, by mail or otherwise,
coming within a specified distance of, or disturbing the peace of the
child or any other child in the household; and (2) excluding any
person from the dwelling of the person who has care, custody, and
control of the child. A court may also issue an ex parte order
enjoining any person from molesting, attacking, striking, stalking,
threatening, sexually assaulting, battering, harassing, telephoning,
including, but not limited to, making annoying telephone calls as
described in Section 653m of the Penal Code, destroying the personal
property, contacting, either directly or indirectly, by mail or
otherwise, coming within a specified distance of, or disturbing the
peace of any parent, legal guardian, or current caretaker of the
child, regardless of whether the child resides with that parent,
legal guardian, or current caretaker, upon application in the manner
provided by Section 527 of the Code of Civil Procedure or, if related
to domestic violence, in the manner provided by Section 6300 of the
Family Code. A court may also issue an ex parte order enjoining any
person from molesting, attacking, striking, stalking, threatening,
sexually assaulting, battering, harassing, telephoning, including,
but not limited to, making annoying telephone calls as described in
Section 653m of the Penal Code, destroying the personal property,
contacting, either directly or indirectly, by mail or otherwise,
coming within a specified distance of, or disturbing the peace of thechild's current or former social worker or court appointed special
advocate, upon application in the manner provided by Section 527 of
the Code of Civil Procedure.
(b) After a petition has been filed pursuant to Section 601 or 602
to declare a child a ward of the juvenile court, and until the time
that the petition is dismissed or wardship is terminated, upon
application in the manner provided by Section 527 of the Code of
Civil Procedure or, if related to domestic violence, in the manner
provided by Section 6300 of the Family Code, the juvenile court may
issue ex parte orders (1) enjoining any person from molesting,
attacking, striking, stalking, threatening, sexually assaulting,
battering, harassing, telephoning, including, but not limited to,
making annoying telephone calls as described in Section 653m of the
Penal Code, destroying the personal property, contacting, either
directly or indirectly, by mail or otherwise, coming within a
specified distance of, or disturbing the peace of the child or any
other child in the household; (2) excluding any person from the
dwelling of the person who has care, custody, and control of the
child; or (3) enjoining the child from contacting, threatening,
stalking, or disturbing the peace of any person the court finds to be
at risk from the conduct of the child, or with whom association
would be detrimental to the child. A court may also issue an ex parte
order enjoining any person from molesting, attacking, striking,
stalking, threatening, sexually assaulting, battering, harassing,
telephoning, including, but not limited to, making annoying telephone
calls as described in Section 653m of the Penal Code, destroying the
personal property, contacting, either directly or indirectly, by
mail or otherwise, coming within a specified distance of, or
disturbing the peace of any parent, legal guardian, or current
caretaker of the child, regardless of whether the child resides with
that parent, legal guardian, or current caretaker, upon application
in the manner provided by Section 527 of the Code of Civil Procedure
or, if related to domestic violence, in the manner provided by
Section 6300 of the Family Code. A court may also issue an ex parte
order enjoining any person from molesting, attacking, striking,
stalking, threatening, sexually assaulting, battering, harassing,
telephoning, including, but not limited to, making annoying telephone
calls as described in Section 653m of the Penal Code, destroying the
personal property, contacting, either directly or indirectly, by
mail or otherwise, coming within a specified distance of, or
disturbing the peace of the child's current or former probation
officer or court appointed special advocate, upon application in the
manner provided by Section 527 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
(c) If a temporary restraining order is granted without notice,
the matter shall be made returnable on an order requiring cause to be
shown why the order should not be granted, on the earliest day that
the business of the court will permit, but not later than 21 days or,
if good cause appears to the court, 25 days from the date the
temporary restraining order is granted. The court may, on the motion
of the person seeking the restraining order, or on its own motion,
shorten the time for service of the order to show cause on the person
to be restrained. The court may, upon its own motion or the filing
of a declaration by the person seeking the restraining order, find
that the person to be restrained could not be served within the time
required by law and reissue an order previously issued and dissolved
by the court for failure to serve the person to be restrained. The
reissued order shall remain in effect until the date set for thehearing. The reissued order shall state on its face the date of
expiration of the order. Any hearing pursuant to this section may be
held simultaneously with any regularly scheduled hearings held in
proceedings to declare a child a dependent child or ward of the
juvenile court pursuant to Section 300, 601, or 602, or subsequent
hearings regarding the dependent child or ward.
(d) (1) The juvenile court may issue, upon notice and a hearing,
any of the orders set forth in subdivisions (a), (b), and (c). Any
restraining order granted pursuant to this subdivision shall remain
in effect, in the discretion of the court, no more than three years,
unless otherwise terminated by the court, extended by mutual consent
of all parties to the restraining order, or extended by further order
of the court on the motion of any party to the restraining order.
(2) If an action is filed for the purpose of terminating or
modifying a protective order prior to the expiration date specified
in the order by a party other than the protected party, the party who
is protected by the order shall be given notice, pursuant to
subdivision (b) of Section 1005 of the Code of Civil Procedure, of
the proceeding by personal service or, if the protected party has
satisfied the requirements of Chapter 3.1 (commencing with Section
6205) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the Government Code, by service on
the Secretary of State. If the party who is protected by the order
cannot be notified prior to the hearing for modification or
termination of the protective order, the juvenile court shall deny
the motion to modify or terminate the order without prejudice or
continue the hearing until the party who is protected can be properly
noticed and may, upon a showing of good cause, specify another
method for service of process that is reasonably designed to afford
actual notice to the protected party. The protected party may waive
his or her right to notice if he or she is physically present and
does not challenge the sufficiency of the notice.
(e) (1) The juvenile court may issue an order made pursuant to
subdivision (a), (b), or (d) excluding a person from a residence or
dwelling. This order may be issued for the time and on the conditions
that the court determines, regardless of which party holds legal or
equitable title or is the lessee of the residence or dwelling.
(2) The court may issue an order under paragraph (1) only on a
showing of all of the following:
(A) Facts sufficient for the court to ascertain that the party who
will stay in the dwelling has a right under color of law to
possession of the premises.
(B) That the party to be excluded has assaulted or threatens to
assault the other party or any other person under the care, custody,
and control of the other party, or any minor child of the parties or
of the other party.
(C) That physical or emotional harm would otherwise result to the
other party, to any person under the care, custody, and control of
the other party, or to any minor child of the parties or of the other
party.
(f) Any order issued pursuant to subdivision (a), (b), (c), or (d)
shall state on its face the date of expiration of the order.
(g) All data with respect to a juvenile court protective order, or
extension, modification, or termination thereof, granted pursuant to
subdivision (a), (b), (c), or (d), shall be transmitted by the court
or its designee, within one business day, to law enforcement
personnel by either one of the following methods:
(1) Transmitting a physical copy of the order to a local lawenforcement agency authorized by the Department of Justice to enter
orders into the California Law Enforcement Telecommunications System
(CLETS).
(2) With the approval of the Department of Justice, entering the
order into CLETS directly.
(h) Any willful and knowing violation of any order granted
pursuant to subdivision (a), (b), (c), or (d) shall be a misdemeanor
punishable under Section 273.65 of the Penal Code.
(i) A juvenile court restraining order related to domestic
violence issued by a court pursuant to this section shall be issued
on forms adopted by the Judicial Council of California and that have
been approved by the Department of Justice pursuant to subdivision
(i) of Section 6380 of the Family Code. However, the fact that an
order issued by a court pursuant to this section was not issued on
forms adopted by the Judicial Council and approved by the Department
of Justice shall not, in and of itself, make the order unenforceable.
(j) (1) Prior to a hearing on the issuance or denial of an order
under this part, a search shall be conducted as described in
subdivision (a) of Section 6306 of the Family Code.
(2) Prior to deciding whether to issue an order under this part,
the court shall consider the following information obtained pursuant
to a search conducted under paragraph (1): any conviction for a
violent felony specified in Section 667.5 of the Penal Code or a
serious felony specified in Section 1192.7 of the Penal Code; any
misdemeanor conviction involving domestic violence, weapons, or other
violence; any outstanding warrant; parole or probation status; any
prior restraining order; and any violation of a prior restraining
order.
(3) (A) If the results of the search conducted pursuant to
paragraph (1) indicate that an outstanding warrant exists against the
subject of the search, the court shall order the clerk of the court
to immediately notify, by the most effective means available,
appropriate law enforcement officials of any information obtained
through the search that the court determines is appropriate. The law
enforcement officials notified shall take all actions necessary to
execute any outstanding warrants or any other actions, as appropriate
and as soon as practicable.
(B) If the results of the search conducted pursuant to paragraph
(1) indicate that the subject of the search is currently on parole or
probation, the court shall order the clerk of the court to
immediately notify, by the most effective means available, the
appropriate parole or probation officer of any information obtained
through the search that the court determines is appropriate. The
parole or probation officer notified shall take all actions necessary
to revoke any parole or probation, or any other actions, with
respect to the subject person, as appropriate and as soon as
practicable.
(k) Upon making any order for custody or visitation pursuant to
this section, the court shall follow the procedures specified in
subdivisions (c) and (d) of Section 6323 of the Family Code.328. Whenever the social worker has cause to believe that there was
or is within the county, or residing therein, a person described in
Section 300, the social worker shall immediately make any
investigation he or she deems necessary to determine whether child
welfare services should be offered to the family and whether
proceedings in the juvenile court should be commenced. If the social
worker determines that it is appropriate to offer child welfare
services to the family, the social worker shall make a referral to
these services pursuant to Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 16500)
of Part 4 of Division 9. No inference regarding the credibility of
the allegations or the need for child welfare services shall be drawn
from the mere existence of a child custody or visitation dispute.
However, this section does not require an investigation by the
social worker with respect to a child delivered or referred to any
agency pursuant to Section 307.5.
The social worker shall interview any child four years of age or
older who is a subject of an investigation, and who is in juvenile
hall or other custodial facility, or has been removed to a foster
home, to ascertain the child's view of the home environment. If
proceedings are commenced, the social worker shall include the
substance of the interview in any written report submitted at an
adjudicatory hearing, or if no report is then received in evidence,
the social worker shall include the substance of the interview in the
social study required by Section 358. A referral based on
allegations of child abuse from the family court pursuant to Section
3027 of the Family Code shall be investigated to the same extent as
any other child abuse allegation.
827.10. (a) Notwithstanding Section 827, the child welfare agency
is authorized to permit its files and records relating to a minor,
who is the subject of either a family law or a probate guardianship
case involving custody or visitation issues, or both, to be inspected
by, and to provide copies to, the following persons, if these
persons are actively participating in the family law or probate case:
(1) The judge, commissioner, or other hearing officer assigned to
the family law or probate case.
(2) The parent or guardian of the minor.
(3) An attorney for a party to the family law or probate case.
(4) A family court mediator assigned to a case involving the minor
pursuant to Article 1 (commencing with Section 3160) of Chapter 11
of Part 2 of Division 8 of the Family Code.
(5) A court-appointed investigator, evaluator, or a person
conducting a court-connected child custody evaluation, investigation,
or assessment pursuant to Section 3111 or 3118 of the Family Code or
Part 2 (commencing with Section 1500) of Division 4 of the Probate
Code.
(6) Counsel appointed for the minor in the family law case
pursuant to Section 3150 of the Family Code. Prior to allowing
counsel appointed for the minor in the family law case to inspect the
file, the court clerk may require counsel to provide a certified
copy of the court order appointing him or her as the counsel for the
minor.
(b) If the child welfare agency files or records, or any portions
thereof, are privileged or confidential pursuant to any other state
law, except Section 827, or federal law or regulation, the
requirements of that state law or federal law or regulationprohibiting or limiting release of the child welfare agency files or
records, or any portions thereof, shall prevail.
(c) A social worker may testify in any family or probate
proceeding with regard to any information that may be disclosed under
this section.
(d) Any records or information obtained pursuant to this section,
including the testimony of a social worker, shall be maintained
solely in the confidential portion of the family law or probate file.
Probate Code Section
1514.5. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, except
provisions of law governing the retention and storage of data, a
family law court shall, upon request from the court in any county
hearing a probate guardianship matter proceeding before the court
pursuant to this part, provide to the court all available information
the court deems necessary to make a determination regarding the best
interest of a child, as described in Section 3011 of the Family
Code, who is the subject of the proceeding. The information shall
also be released to a guardianship investigator, as provided in
subdivision (a) of Section 1513, acting within the scope of his or
her duties in that proceeding. Any information released pursuant to
this section that is confidential pursuant to any other provision of
law shall remain confidential and may not be released, except to the
extent necessary to comply with this section. No records shared
pursuant to this section may be disclosed to any party in a case
unless the party requests the agency or court that originates the
record to release these records and the request is granted. In
counties that provide confidential family law mediation, or
confidential dependency mediation, those mediations are not covered
by this section.
Penal Code Sections
136.2. (a) (1) Upon a good cause belief that harm to, or
intimidation or dissuasion of, a victim or witness has occurred or is
reasonably likely to occur, a court with jurisdiction over a
criminal matter may issue orders, including, but not limited to, the
following:
(A) An order issued pursuant to Section 6320 of the Family Code.
(B) An order that a defendant shall not violate any provision of
Section 136.1.
(C) An order that a person before the court other than a
defendant, including, but not limited to, a subpoenaed witness or
other person entering the courtroom of the court, shall not violate
any provisions of Section 136.1.
(D) An order that a person described in this section shall have no
communication whatsoever with a specified witness or a victim,
except through an attorney under reasonable restrictions that the
court may impose.
(E) An order calling for a hearing to determine if an order as
described in subparagraphs (A) to (D), inclusive, should be issued.
(F) (i) An order that a particular law enforcement agency within
the jurisdiction of the court provide protection for a victim or a
witness, or both, or for immediate family members of a victim or awitness who reside in the same household as the victim or witness or
within reasonable proximity of the victim's or witness' household, as
determined by the court. The order shall not be made without the
consent of the law enforcement agency except for limited and
specified periods of time and upon an express finding by the court of
a clear and present danger of harm to the victim or witness or
immediate family members of the victim or witness.
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph, "immediate family members"
include the spouse, children, or parents of the victim or witness.
(G) (i) An order protecting a victim or witness of violent crime
from all contact by the defendant, or contact, with the intent to
annoy, harass, threaten, or commit acts of violence, by the
defendant. The court or its designee shall transmit orders made under
this paragraph to law enforcement personnel within one business day
of the issuance, modification, extension, or termination of the
order, pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 6380 of the Family
Code. It is the responsibility of the court to transmit the
modification, extension, or termination orders made under this
paragraph to the same agency that entered the original protective
order into the Domestic Violence Restraining Order System.
(ii) (I) If a court does not issue an order pursuant to clause (i)
in a case in which the defendant is charged with a crime involving
domestic violence as defined in Section 13700 or in Section 6211 of
the Family Code, the court on its own motion shall consider issuing a
protective order upon a good cause belief that harm to, or
intimidation or dissuasion of, a victim or witness has occurred or is
reasonably likely to occur, that provides as follows:
(ia) The defendant shall not own, possess, purchase, receive, or
attempt to purchase or receive, a firearm while the protective order
is in effect.
(ib) The defendant shall relinquish any firearms that he or she
owns or possesses pursuant to Section 527.9 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.
(II) Every person who owns, possesses, purchases, or receives, or
attempts to purchase or receive, a firearm while this protective
order is in effect is punishable pursuant to Section 29825.
(iii) An order issued, modified, extended, or terminated by a
court pursuant to this subparagraph shall be issued on forms adopted
by the Judicial Council of California and that have been approved by
the Department of Justice pursuant to subdivision (i) of Section 6380
of the Family Code. However, the fact that an order issued by a
court pursuant to this section was not issued on forms adopted by the
Judicial Council and approved by the Department of Justice shall
not, in and of itself, make the order unenforceable.
(iv) A protective order issued under this subparagraph may require
the defendant to be placed on electronic monitoring if the local
government, with the concurrence of the county sheriff or the chief
probation officer with jurisdiction, adopts a policy to authorize
electronic monitoring of defendants and specifies the agency with
jurisdiction for this purpose. If the court determines that the
defendant has the ability to pay for the monitoring program, the
court shall order the defendant to pay for the monitoring. If the
court determines that the defendant does not have the ability to pay
for the electronic monitoring, the court may order electronic
monitoring to be paid for by the local government that adopted the
policy to authorize electronic monitoring. The duration of electronic
monitoring shall not exceed one year from the date the order isissued. At no time shall the electronic monitoring be in place if the
protective order is not in place.
(2) For purposes of this subdivision, a minor who was not a victim
of, but who was physically present at the time of, an act of
domestic violence, is a witness and is deemed to have suffered harm
within the meaning of paragraph (1).
(b) A person violating an order made pursuant to subparagraphs (A)
to (G), inclusive, of paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) may be
punished for any substantive offense described in Section 136.1, or
for a contempt of the court making the order. A finding of contempt
shall not be a bar to prosecution for a violation of Section 136.1.
However, a person so held in contempt shall be entitled to credit for
punishment imposed therein against a sentence imposed upon
conviction of an offense described in Section 136.1. A conviction or
acquittal for a substantive offense under Section 136.1 shall be a
bar to a subsequent punishment for contempt arising out of the same
act.
(c) (1) (A) Notwithstanding subdivision (e), an emergency
protective order issued pursuant to Chapter 2 (commencing with
Section 6250) of Part 3 of Division 10 of the Family Code or Section
646.91 shall have precedence in enforcement over any other
restraining or protective order, provided the emergency protective
order meets all of the following requirements:
(i) The emergency protective order is issued to protect one or
more individuals who are already protected persons under another
restraining or protective order.
(ii) The emergency protective order restrains the individual who
is the restrained person in the other restraining or protective order
specified in clause (i).
(iii) The provisions of the emergency protective order are more
restrictive in relation to the restrained person than are the
provisions of the other restraining or protective order specified in
clause (i).
(B) An emergency protective order that meets the requirements of
subparagraph (A) shall have precedence in enforcement over the
provisions of any other restraining or protective order only with
respect to those provisions of the emergency protective order that
are more restrictive in relation to the restrained person.
(2) Except as described in paragraph (1), a no-contact order, as
described in Section 6320 of the Family Code, shall have precedence
in enforcement over any other restraining or protective order.
(d) (1) A person subject to a protective order issued under this
section shall not own, possess, purchase, or receive, or attempt to
purchase or receive, a firearm while the protective order is in
effect.
(2) The court shall order a person subject to a protective order
issued under this section to relinquish any firearms he or she owns
or possesses pursuant to Section 527.9 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.
(3) A person who owns, possesses, purchases, or receives, or
attempts to purchase or receive, a firearm while the protective order
is in effect is punishable pursuant to Section 29825.
(e) (1) In all cases in which the defendant is charged with a
crime involving domestic violence, as defined in Section 13700 or in
Section 6211 of the Family Code, or a violation of Section 261,
261.5, or 262, or any crime that requires the defendant to register
pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 290, the court shall considerissuing the above-described orders on its own motion. All interested
parties shall receive a copy of those orders. In order to facilitate
this, the court's records of all criminal cases involving domestic
violence or a violation of Section 261, 261.5, or 262, or any crime
that requires the defendant to register pursuant to subdivision (c)
of Section 290, shall be marked to clearly alert the court to this
issue.
(2) In those cases in which a complaint, information, or
indictment charging a crime involving domestic violence, as defined
in Section 13700 or in Section 6211 of the Family Code, or a
violation of Section 261, 261.5, or 262, or any crime that requires
the defendant to register pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 290,
has been issued, except as described in subdivision (c), a
restraining order or protective order against the defendant issued by
the criminal court in that case has precedence in enforcement over a
civil court order against the defendant.
(3) Custody and visitation with respect to the defendant and his
or her minor children may be ordered by a family or juvenile court
consistent with the protocol established pursuant to subdivision (f),
but if ordered after a criminal protective order has been issued
pursuant to this section, the custody and visitation order shall make
reference to, and, if there is not an emergency protective order
that has precedence in enforcement pursuant to paragraph (1) of
subdivision (c), or a no-contact order, as described in Section 6320
of the Family Code, acknowledge the precedence of enforcement of, an
appropriate criminal protective order. On or before July 1, 2014, the
Judicial Council shall modify the criminal and civil court forms
consistent with this subdivision.
(f) On or before January 1, 2003, the Judicial Council shall
promulgate a protocol, for adoption by each local court in
substantially similar terms, to provide for the timely coordination
of all orders against the same defendant and in favor of the same
named victim or victims. The protocol shall include, but shall not be
limited to, mechanisms for ensuring appropriate communication and
information sharing between criminal, family, and juvenile courts
concerning orders and cases that involve the same parties, and shall
permit a family or juvenile court order to coexist with a criminal
court protective order subject to the following conditions:
(1) An order that permits contact between the restrained person
and his or her children shall provide for the safe exchange of the
children and shall not contain language either printed or handwritten
that violates a "no-contact order" issued by a criminal court.
(2) Safety of all parties shall be the courts' paramount concern.
The family or juvenile court shall specify the time, day, place, and
manner of transfer of the child, as provided in Section 3100 of the
Family Code.
(g) On or before January 1, 2003, the Judicial Council shall
modify the criminal and civil court protective order forms consistent
with this section.
(h) (1) In any case in which a complaint, information, or
indictment charging a crime involving domestic violence, as defined
in Section 13700 or in Section 6211 of the Family Code, has been
filed, the court may consider, in determining whether good cause
exists to issue an order under subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of
subdivision (a), the underlying nature of the offense charged, and
the information provided to the court pursuant to Section 273.75.
(2) In any case in which a complaint, information, or indictmentcharging a violation of Section 261, 261.5, or 262, or any crime that
requires the defendant to register pursuant to subdivision (c) of
Section 290, has been filed, the court may consider, in determining
whether good cause exists to issue an order under paragraph (1) of
subdivision (a), the underlying nature of the offense charged, the
defendant's relationship to the victim, the likelihood of continuing
harm to the victim, any current restraining order or protective order
issued by any civil or criminal court involving the defendant, and
the defendant's criminal history, including, but not limited to,
prior convictions for a violation of Section 261, 261.5, or 262, or
any crime that requires the defendant to register pursuant to
subdivision (c) of Section 290, or any other forms of violence, or
any weapons offenses.
(i) (1) In all cases in which a criminal defendant has been
convicted of a crime involving domestic violence as defined in
Section 13700 or in Section 6211 of the Family Code, a violation of
Section 261, 261.5, or 262, or any crime that requires the defendant
to register pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 290, the court, at
the time of sentencing, shall consider issuing an order restraining
the defendant from any contact with the victim. The order may be
valid for up to 10 years, as determined by the court. This protective
order may be issued by the court regardless of whether the defendant
is sentenced to the state prison or a county jail, or whether
imposition of sentence is suspended and the defendant is placed on
probation. It is the intent of the Legislature in enacting this
subdivision that the duration of any restraining order issued by the
court be based upon the seriousness of the facts before the court,
the probability of future violations, and the safety of the victim
and his or her immediate family.
(2) An order under this subdivision may include provisions for
electronic monitoring if the local government, upon receiving the
concurrence of the county sheriff or the chief probation officer with
jurisdiction, adopts a policy authorizing electronic monitoring of
defendants and specifies the agency with jurisdiction for this
purpose. If the court determines that the defendant has the ability
to pay for the monitoring program, the court shall order the
defendant to pay for the monitoring. If the court determines that the
defendant does not have the ability to pay for the electronic
monitoring, the court may order the electronic monitoring to be paid
for by the local government that adopted the policy authorizing
electronic monitoring. The duration of the electronic monitoring
shall not exceed one year from the date the order is issued.
(j) For purposes of this section, "local government" means the
county that has jurisdiction over the protective order.1203.097. (a) If a person is granted probation for a crime in which
the victim is a person defined in Section 6211 of the Family Code,
the terms of probation shall include all of the following:
(1) A minimum period of probation of 36 months, which may include
a period of summary probation as appropriate.
(2) A criminal court protective order protecting the victim from
further acts of violence, threats, stalking, sexual abuse, and
harassment, and, if appropriate, containing residence exclusion or
stay-away conditions.
(3) Notice to the victim of the disposition of the case.
(4) Booking the defendant within one week of sentencing if the
defendant has not already been booked.
(5) (A) A minimum payment by the defendant of a fee of five
hundred dollars ($500) to be disbursed as specified in this
paragraph. If, after a hearing in open court, the court finds that
the defendant does not have the ability to pay, the court may reduce
or waive this fee. If the court exercises its discretion to reduce or
waive the fee, it shall state the reason on the record.
(B) Two-thirds of the moneys deposited with the county treasurer
pursuant to this section shall be retained by counties and deposited
in the domestic violence programs special fund created pursuant to
Section 18305 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, to be expended
for the purposes of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 18290) of Part
6 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. Of the moneys
deposited in the domestic violence programs special fund, no more
than 8 percent may be used for administrative costs, as specified in
Section 18305 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(C) The remaining one-third of the moneys shall be transferred,
once a month, to the Controller for deposit in equal amounts in the
Domestic Violence Restraining Order Reimbursement Fund and in the
Domestic Violence Training and Education Fund, which are hereby
created, in an amount equal to one-third of funds collected during
the preceding month. Moneys deposited into these funds pursuant to
this section shall be available upon appropriation by the Legislature
and shall be distributed each fiscal year as follows:
(i) Funds from the Domestic Violence Restraining Order
Reimbursement Fund shall be distributed to local law enforcement or
other criminal justice agencies for state-mandated local costs
resulting from the notification requirements set forth in subdivision
(b) of Section 6380 of the Family Code, based on the annual
notification from the Department of Justice of the number of
restraining orders issued and registered in the state domestic
violence restraining order registry maintained by the Department of
Justice, for the development and maintenance of the domestic violence
restraining order databank system.
(ii) Funds from the Domestic Violence Training and Education Fund
shall support a statewide training and education program to increase
public awareness of domestic violence and to improve the scope and
quality of services provided to the victims of domestic violence.
Grants to support this program shall be awarded on a competitive
basis and be administered by the State Department of Public Health,
in consultation with the statewide domestic violence coalition, which
is eligible to receive funding under this section.
(D) The fee imposed by this paragraph shall be treated as a fee,
not as a fine, and shall not be subject to reduction for time servedas provided pursuant to Section 1205 or 2900.5.
(E) The fee imposed by this paragraph may be collected by the
collecting agency, or the agency's designee, after the termination of
the period of probation, whether probation is terminated by
revocation or by completion of the term.
(6) Successful completion of a batterer's program, as defined in
subdivision (c), or if none is available, another appropriate
counseling program designated by the court, for a period not less
than one year with periodic progress reports by the program to the
court every three months or less and weekly sessions of a minimum of
two hours class time duration. The defendant shall attend consecutive
weekly sessions, unless granted an excused absence for good cause by
the program for no more than three individual sessions during the
entire program, and shall complete the program within 18 months,
unless, after a hearing, the court finds good cause to modify the
requirements of consecutive attendance or completion within 18
months.
(7) (A) (i) The court shall order the defendant to comply with all
probation requirements, including the requirements to attend
counseling, keep all program appointments, and pay program fees based
upon the ability to pay.
(ii) The terms of probation for offenders shall not be lifted
until all reasonable fees due to the counseling program have been
paid in full, but in no case shall probation be extended beyond the
term provided in subdivision (a) of Section 1203.1. If the court
finds that the defendant does not have the ability to pay the fees
based on the defendant's changed circumstances, the court may reduce
or waive the fees.
(B) Upon request by the batterer's program, the court shall
provide the defendant's arrest report, prior incidents of violence,
and treatment history to the program.
(8) The court also shall order the defendant to perform a
specified amount of appropriate community service, as designated by
the court. The defendant shall present the court with proof of
completion of community service and the court shall determine if the
community service has been satisfactorily completed. If sufficient
staff and resources are available, the community service shall be
performed under the jurisdiction of the local agency overseeing a
community service program.
(9) If the program finds that the defendant is unsuitable, the
program shall immediately contact the probation department or the
court. The probation department or court shall either recalendar the
case for hearing or refer the defendant to an appropriate alternative
batterer's program.
(10) (A) Upon recommendation of the program, a court shall require
a defendant to participate in additional sessions throughout the
probationary period, unless it finds that it is not in the interests
of justice to do so, states its reasons on the record, and enters
them into the minutes. In deciding whether the defendant would
benefit from more sessions, the court shall consider whether any of
the following conditions exists:
(i) The defendant has been violence free for a minimum of six
months.
(ii) The defendant has cooperated and participated in the batterer'
s program.
(iii) The defendant demonstrates an understanding of and practices
positive conflict resolution skills.(iv) The defendant blames, degrades, or has committed acts that
dehumanize the victim or puts at risk the victim's safety, including,
but not limited to, molesting, stalking, striking, attacking,
threatening, sexually assaulting, or battering the victim.
(v) The defendant demonstrates an understanding that the use of
coercion or violent behavior to maintain dominance is unacceptable in
an intimate relationship.
(vi) The defendant has made threats to harm anyone in any manner.
(vii) The defendant has complied with applicable requirements
under paragraph (6) of subdivision (c) or subparagraph (C) to receive
alcohol counseling, drug counseling, or both.
(viii) The defendant demonstrates acceptance of responsibility for
the abusive behavior perpetrated against the victim.
(B) The program shall immediately report any violation of the
terms of the protective order, including any new acts of violence or
failure to comply with the program requirements, to the court, the
prosecutor, and, if formal probation has been ordered, to the
probation department. The probationer shall file proof of enrollment
in a batterer's program with the court within 30 days of conviction.
(C) Concurrent with other requirements under this section, in
addition to, and not in lieu of, the batterer's program, and unless
prohibited by the referring court, the probation department or the
court may make provisions for a defendant to use his or her resources
to enroll in a chemical dependency program or to enter voluntarily a
licensed chemical dependency recovery hospital or residential
treatment program that has a valid license issued by the state to
provide alcohol or drug services to receive program participation
credit, as determined by the court. The probation department shall
document evidence of this hospital or residential treatment
participation in the defendant's program file.
(11) The conditions of probation may include, in lieu of a fine,
but not in lieu of the fund payment required under paragraph (5), one
or more of the following requirements:
(A) That the defendant make payments to a battered women's
shelter, up to a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000).
(B) That the defendant reimburse the victim for reasonable
expenses that the court finds are the direct result of the defendant'
s offense.
For any order to pay a fine, to make payments to a battered women'
s shelter, or to pay restitution as a condition of probation under
this subdivision, the court shall make a determination of the
defendant's ability to pay. Determination of a defendant's ability to
pay may include his or her future earning capacity. A defendant
shall bear the burden of demonstrating lack of his or her ability to
pay. Express findings by the court as to the factors bearing on the
amount of the fine shall not be required. In no event shall any order
to make payments to a battered women's shelter be made if it would
impair the ability of the defendant to pay direct restitution to the
victim or court-ordered child support. When the injury to a married
person is caused, in whole or in part, by the criminal acts of his or
her spouse in violation of this section, the community property
shall not be used to discharge the liability of the offending spouse
for restitution to the injured spouse, as required by Section
1203.04, as operative on or before August 2, 1995, or Section 1202.4,
or to a shelter for costs with regard to the injured spouse, until
all separate property of the offending spouse is exhausted.
(12) If it appears to the prosecuting attorney, the court, or theprobation department that the defendant is performing
unsatisfactorily in the assigned program, is not benefiting from
counseling, or has engaged in criminal conduct, upon request of the
probation officer, the prosecuting attorney, or on its own motion,
the court, as a priority calendar item, shall hold a hearing to
determine whether further sentencing should proceed. The court may
consider factors, including, but not limited to, any violence by the
defendant against the former or a new victim while on probation and
noncompliance with any other specific condition of probation. If the
court finds that the defendant is not performing satisfactorily in
the assigned program, is not benefiting from the program, has not
complied with a condition of probation, or has engaged in criminal
conduct, the court shall terminate the defendant's participation in
the program and shall proceed with further sentencing.
(b) If a person is granted formal probation for a crime in which
the victim is a person defined in Section 6211 of the Family Code, in
addition to the terms specified in subdivision (a), all of the
following shall apply:
(1) The probation department shall make an investigation and take
into consideration the defendant's age, medical history, employment
and service records, educational background, community and family
ties, prior incidents of violence, police report, treatment history,
if any, demonstrable motivation, and other mitigating factors in
determining which batterer's program would be appropriate for the
defendant. This information shall be provided to the batterer's
program if it is requested. The probation department shall also
determine which community programs the defendant would benefit from
and which of those programs would accept the defendant. The probation
department shall report its findings and recommendations to the
court.
(2) The court shall advise the defendant that the failure to
report to the probation department for the initial investigation, as
directed by the court, or the failure to enroll in a specified
program, as directed by the court or the probation department, shall
result in possible further incarceration. The court, in the interests
of justice, may relieve the defendant from the prohibition set forth
in this subdivision based upon the defendant's mistake or excusable
neglect. Application for this relief shall be filed within 20 court
days of the missed deadline. This time limitation may not be
extended. A copy of any application for relief shall be served on the
office of the prosecuting attorney.
(3) After the court orders the defendant to a batterer's program,
the probation department shall conduct an initial assessment of the
defendant, including, but not limited to, all of the following:
(A) Social, economic, and family background.
(B) Education.
(C) Vocational achievements.
(D) Criminal history.
(E) Medical history.
(F) Substance abuse history.
(G) Consultation with the probation officer.
(H) Verbal consultation with the victim, only if the victim
desires to participate.
(I) Assessment of the future probability of the defendant
committing murder.
(4) The probation department shall attempt to notify the victim
regarding the requirements for the defendant's participation in thebatterer's program, as well as regarding available victim resources.
The victim also shall be informed that attendance in any program does
not guarantee that an abuser will not be violent.
(c) The court or the probation department shall refer defendants
only to batterer's programs that follow standards outlined in
paragraph (1), which may include, but are not limited to, lectures,
classes, group discussions, and counseling. The probation department
shall design and implement an approval and renewal process for
batterer's programs and shall solicit input from criminal justice
agencies and domestic violence victim advocacy programs.
(1) The goal of a batterer's program under this section shall be
to stop domestic violence. A batterer's program shall consist of the
following components:
(A) Strategies to hold the defendant accountable for the violence
in a relationship, including, but not limited to, providing the
defendant with a written statement that the defendant shall be held
accountable for acts or threats of domestic violence.
(B) A requirement that the defendant participate in ongoing
same-gender group sessions.
(C) An initial intake that provides written definitions to the
defendant of physical, emotional, sexual, economic, and verbal abuse,
and the techniques for stopping these types of abuse.
(D) Procedures to inform the victim regarding the requirements for
the defendant's participation in the intervention program as well as
regarding available victim resources. The victim also shall be
informed that attendance in any program does not guarantee that an
abuser will not be violent.
(E) A requirement that the defendant attend group sessions free of
chemical influence.
(F) Educational programming that examines, at a minimum, gender
roles, socialization, the nature of violence, the dynamics of power
and control, and the effects of abuse on children and others.
(G) A requirement that excludes any couple counseling or family
counseling, or both.
(H) Procedures that give the program the right to assess whether
or not the defendant would benefit from the program and to refuse to
enroll the defendant if it is determined that the defendant would not
benefit from the program, so long as the refusal is not because of
the defendant's inability to pay. If possible, the program shall
suggest an appropriate alternative program.
(I) Program staff who, to the extent possible, have specific
knowledge regarding, but not limited to, spousal abuse, child abuse,
sexual abuse, substance abuse, the dynamics of violence and abuse,
the law, and procedures of the legal system.
(J) Program staff who are encouraged to utilize the expertise,
training, and assistance of local domestic violence centers.
(K) A requirement that the defendant enter into a written
agreement with the program, which shall include an outline of the
contents of the program, the attendance requirements, the requirement
to attend group sessions free of chemical influence, and a statement
that the defendant may be removed from the program if it is
determined that the defendant is not benefiting from the program or
is disruptive to the program.
(L) A requirement that the defendant sign a confidentiality
statement prohibiting disclosure of any information obtained through
participating in the program or during group sessions regarding other
participants in the program.(M) Program content that provides cultural and ethnic sensitivity.
(N) A requirement of a written referral from the court or
probation department prior to permitting the defendant to enroll in
the program. The written referral shall state the number of minimum
sessions required by the court.
(O) Procedures for submitting to the probation department all of
the following uniform written responses:
(i) Proof of enrollment, to be submitted to the court and the
probation department and to include the fee determined to be charged
to the defendant, based upon the ability to pay, for each session.
(ii) Periodic progress reports that include attendance, fee
payment history, and program compliance.
(iii) Final evaluation that includes the program's evaluation of
the defendant's progress, using the criteria set forth in
subparagraph (A) of paragraph (10) of subdivision (a), and
recommendation for either successful or unsuccessful termination or
continuation in the program.
(P) A sliding fee schedule based on the defendant's ability to
pay. The batterer's program shall develop and utilize a sliding fee
scale that recognizes both the defendant's ability to pay and the
necessity of programs to meet overhead expenses. An indigent
defendant may negotiate a deferred payment schedule, but shall pay a
nominal fee, if the defendant has the ability to pay the nominal fee.
Upon a hearing and a finding by the court that the defendant does
not have the financial ability to pay the nominal fee, the court
shall waive this fee. The payment of the fee shall be made a
condition of probation if the court determines the defendant has the
present ability to pay the fee. The fee shall be paid during the term
of probation unless the program sets other conditions. The
acceptance policies shall be in accordance with the scaled fee
system.
(2) The court shall refer persons only to batterer's programs that
have been approved by the probation department pursuant to paragraph
(5). The probation department shall do both of the following:
(A) Provide for the issuance of a provisional approval, provided
that the applicant is in substantial compliance with applicable laws
and regulations and an urgent need for approval exists. A provisional
approval shall be considered an authorization to provide services
and shall not be considered a vested right.
(B) If the probation department determines that a program is not
in compliance with standards set by the department, the department
shall provide written notice of the noncompliant areas to the
program. The program shall submit a written plan of corrections
within 14 days from the date of the written notice on noncompliance.
A plan of correction shall include, but not be limited to, a
description of each corrective action and timeframe for
implementation. The department shall review and approve all or any
part of the plan of correction and notify the program of approval or
disapproval in writing. If the program fails to submit a plan of
correction or fails to implement the approved plan of correction, the
department shall consider whether to revoke or suspend approval and,
upon revoking or suspending approval, shall have the option to cease
referrals of defendants under this section.
(3) No program, regardless of its source of funding, shall be
approved unless it meets all of the following standards:
(A) The establishment of guidelines and criteria for education
services, including standards of services that may include lectures,classes, and group discussions.
(B) Supervision of the defendant for the purpose of evaluating the
person's progress in the program.
(C) Adequate reporting requirements to ensure that all persons
who, after being ordered to attend and complete a program, may be
identified for either failure to enroll in, or failure to
successfully complete, the program or for the successful completion
of the program as ordered. The program shall notify the court and the
probation department, in writing, within the period of time and in
the manner specified by the court of any person who fails to complete
the program. Notification shall be given if the program determines
that the defendant is performing unsatisfactorily or if the defendant
is not benefiting from the education, treatment, or counseling.
(D) No victim shall be compelled to participate in a program or
counseling, and no program may condition a defendant's enrollment on
participation by the victim.
(4) In making referrals of indigent defendants to approved
batterer's programs, the probation department shall apportion these
referrals evenly among the approved programs.
(5) The probation department shall have the sole authority to
approve a batterer's program for probation. The program shall be
required to obtain only one approval but shall renew that approval
annually.
(A) The procedure for the approval of a new or existing program
shall include all of the following:
(i) The completion of a written application containing necessary
and pertinent information describing the applicant program.
(ii) The demonstration by the program that it possesses adequate
administrative and operational capability to operate a batterer's
treatment program. The program shall provide documentation to prove
that the program has conducted batterer's programs for at least one
year prior to application. This requirement may be waived under
subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) if there is no existing batterer's
program in the city, county, or city and county.
(iii) The onsite review of the program, including monitoring of a
session to determine that the program adheres to applicable statutes
and regulations.
(iv) The payment of the approval fee.
(B) The probation department shall fix a fee for approval not to
exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250) and for approval renewal not
to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250) every year in an amount
sufficient to cover its costs in administering the approval process
under this section. No fee shall be charged for the approval of local
governmental entities.
(C) The probation department has the sole authority to approve the
issuance, denial, suspension, or revocation of approval and to cease
new enrollments or referrals to a batterer's program under this
section. The probation department shall review information relative
to a program's performance or failure to adhere to standards, or
both. The probation department may suspend or revoke an approval
issued under this subdivision or deny an application to renew an
approval or to modify the terms and conditions of approval, based on
grounds established by probation, including, but not limited to,
either of the following:
(i) Violation of this section by any person holding approval or by
a program employee in a program under this section.
(ii) Misrepresentation of any material fact in obtaining theapproval.
(6) For defendants who are chronic users or serious abusers of
drugs or alcohol, standard components in the program shall include
concurrent counseling for substance abuse and violent behavior, and
in appropriate cases, detoxification and abstinence from the abused
substance.
(7) The program shall conduct an exit conference that assesses the
defendant's progress during his or her participation in the batterer'
s program.
(d) An act or omission relating to the approval of a batterer's
treatment programs under paragraph (5) of subdivision (c) is a
discretionary act pursuant to Section 820.2 of the Government Code.
13700. As used in this title:
(a) "Abuse" means intentionally or recklessly causing or
attempting to cause bodily injury, or placing another person in
reasonable apprehension of imminent serious bodily injury to himself
or herself, or another.
(b) "Domestic violence" means abuse committed against an adult or
a minor who is a spouse, former spouse, cohabitant, former
cohabitant, or person with whom the suspect has had a child or is
having or has had a dating or engagement relationship. For purposes
of this subdivision, "cohabitant" means two unrelated adult persons
living together for a substantial period of time, resulting in some
permanency of relationship. Factors that may determine whether
persons are cohabiting include, but are not limited to, (1) sexual
relations between the parties while sharing the same living quarters,
(2) sharing of income or expenses, (3) joint use or ownership of
property, (4) whether the parties hold themselves out as husband and
wife, (5) the continuity of the relationship, and (6) the length of
the relationship.
(c) "Officer" means any officer or employee of a local police
department or sheriff's office, and any peace officer of the
Department of the California Highway Patrol, the Department of Parks
and Recreation, the University of California Police Department, or
the California State University and College Police Departments, as
defined in Section 830.2, a peace officer of the Department of
General Services of the City of Los Angeles, as defined in
subdivision (c) of Section 830.31, a housing authority patrol
officer, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 830.31, a peace
officer as defined in subdivisions (a) and (b) of Section 830.32, or
a peace officer as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 830.33.
(d) "Victim" means a person who is a victim of domestic violence.2015 California Rules of Court
Rule 5.440. Related cases
Where resources permit, courts should identify cases related to a pending family law case to avoid issuing conflicting
orders and make effective use of court resources.
(a) Definition of "related case"
For purposes of this rule, a pending family law case is related to another pending case, or to a case that was
dismissed with or without prejudice, or to a case that was disposed of by judgment, if the cases:
(1) Involve the same parties or the parties' minor children;
(2) Are based on issues governed by the Family Code or by the guardianship provisions of the Probate Code;
or
(3) Are likely for other reasons to require substantial duplication of judicial resources if heard by different
judges.
(b) Confidential information
Other than forms providing custody and visitation (parenting time) orders to be filed in the family court, where the
identification of a related case includes a disclosure of information relating to a juvenile dependency or
delinquency matter involving the children of the parties in the pending family law case, the clerk must file that
information in the confidential portion of the court file.
(c) Coordination of title IV-D cases
To the extent possible, courts should coordinate title IV-D (government child support) cases with other related
family law matters.
Rule 5.440 adopted effective January 1, 2013.
Rule 5.445. Court communication protocol for domestic violence and child custody
orders.
(a) Definitions
For purposes of this rule:
(1) (2) (3) "Criminal court protective order" means any court order issued under California Penal Code section 136.2
arising from a complaint, an information, or an indictment in which the victim or witness and the defendant
have a relationship as defined in Family Code section 6211.
"Court" means all departments and divisions of the superior court of a single county.
"Cases involving child custody and visitation" include family, juvenile, probate, and guardianship
proceedings.
(Subd (a) amended effective January 1, 2007.)(b) Purpose
(1) This rule is intended to:
(A) (B) (C) Encourage courts to share information about the existence and terms of criminal court protective
orders and other orders regarding child custody and visitation that involve the defendant and the
victim or witness named in the criminal court protective orders.
Encourage courts hearing cases involving child custody and visitation to take every action practicable
to ensure that they are aware of the existence of any criminal court protective orders involving the
parties to the action currently before them.
Encourage criminal courts to take every action practicable to ensure that they are aware of the
existence of any child custody or visitation court orders involving the defendant in the action currently
before them.
(D) Permit appropriate visitation between a criminal defendant and his or her children under civil court
orders, but at the same time provide for the safety of the victim or witness by ensuring that a criminal
court protective order is not violated.
(E) Protect the rights of all parties and enhance the ability of law enforcement to enforce orders.
(F) Encourage courts to establish regional communication systems with courts in neighboring counties
regarding the existence of and terms of criminal court protective orders.
(2) This rule is not intended to change the procedures, provided in Family Code section 6380, for the
electronic entry of domestic violence restraining orders into the Domestic Violence Restraining Order
System.
(Subd (b) amended effective January 1, 2007.)
(c) Local rule required
Every superior court must, by January 1, 2004, adopt local rules containing, at a minimum, the following
elements:
(1) Court communication
A procedure for communication among courts issuing criminal court protective orders and courts issuing
orders involving child custody and visitation, regarding the existence and terms of criminal protective
orders and child custody and visitation orders, including:
(A) A procedure requiring courts issuing any orders involving child custody or visitation to make
reasonable efforts to determine whether there exists a criminal court protective order that involves
any party to the action; and
(B) A procedure requiring courts issuing criminal court protective orders to make reasonable efforts to
determine whether there exist any child custody or visitation orders that involve any party to the
action.
(2) Modification
A procedure by which the court that has issued a criminal court protective order may, after consultation
with a court that has issued a subsequent child custody or visitation order, modify the criminal court
protective order to allow or restrict contact between the person restrained by the order and his or her
children.(3) Penal Code section 136.2
The requirements of Penal Code section 136.2(f)(1) and (2).
(Subd (c) amended effective January 1, 2007; previously amended effective January 1, 2005.)
Rule 5.445 renumbered effective January 1, 2013; adopted as rule 5.500 effective January 1, 2003; previously amended
effective January 1, 2005; previously amended and renumbered as rule 5.450 effective January 1, 2007.Additional Resources:
Improving Coordination Handbook for California Courts:
http://www.courts.ca.gov/documents/ImprovingCoordination.pdf
Manual on Protecting Children in Families Experiencing DV; Published by US Dept. of Health and Human
Services, Office on Child Abuse and Neglect:
https://www.childwelfare.gov/pubs/usermanuals/domesticviolence/
Families Change (guide to separation and divorce for parents, teens and kids):
http://www.familieschange.ca/
Judge Towns Article on Unified Family Courts:
http://www.preventivelawyer.org/main/default.asp?pid=essays/town.htmBench Guide for Recognizing Dangerousness in Domestic Violence Cases
By Jacquelyn C. Campbell, PhD, RN, FAAN and
Hon. Sharon Chatman, Superior Court of California, County of Santa Clara
This tool is a research-based bench guide for use by judicial officers at all stages of judicial proceedings involving
allegations of domestic violence and orders of protection in civil and criminal domestic violence cases.
Research has proven that there are several factors associated with an increased risk of homicides (murders) of women in intimate partner
domestic violence relationships. This bench guide is not intended to predict what will happen in any given case; it is an informational tool
for your consideration as you review a case and become aware of the extent to which the evidence reveals how many lethality factors
(danger of homicide) are present. This bench guide is not a substitute for judicial experience, knowledge, skills, and intuition.1
Pending/Prior:
 Emergency Protective Order  Criminal Protective Order  Civil Protective Order
 Criminal History Check  Registered Firearms Check
Lethality Factors
Does the alleged perpetrator own a gun? Yes No Does the alleged perpetrator use any of these
illegal drugs: uppers or amphetamines,
Meth, speed, angel dust, cocaine, crack,
street drugs, or mixers?
Yes No
Has the physical violence increased in
severity or frequency over the past year?
Yes No Is the alleged perpetrator an alcoholic or
problem drinker?
Yes No
Has the alleged victim left the alleged
perpetrator after they lived together during
the past year?
Yes No Does the alleged perpetrator try to control
most or all of the alleged victims daily
activities? (i.e., tells victim when to see friends
or family members or how much money to
spend)
Yes No
Is the alleged perpetrator unemployed? Yes No Is the alleged perpetrator violently and
constantly jealous of the alleged victim? (i.e.,
If I cant have you, no one can.)
Yes No
Has the alleged perpetrator ever used or
threatened the victim with a lethal weapon?
Yes No Has the alleged victim been beaten by the
alleged perpetrator while pregnant?
Yes No
Has the alleged perpetrator ever threatened
to kill the victim?
Yes No Has the alleged perpetrator ever threatened
or tried to commit suicide?
Yes No
Has the alleged perpetrator avoided being
arrested for domestic violence?
Yes No Has the alleged perpetrator ever threatened
to harm the alleged victims children?
Yes No
Does the alleged victim have a child that is
not the alleged perpetrators child?
Yes No Does the alleged victim believe that the alleged
perpetrator is capable of killing her/him?
Yes No
Has the alleged perpetrator forced the
alleged victim to have sex when the victim
did not want to?
Yes No Does the alleged perpetrator follow or spy on
the alleged victim, leave threatening notes or
messages, destroy personal property or make
unwanted calls?
Yes No
Has the alleged perpetrator ever tried to
choke/strangle the alleged victim?
Yes No Has the alleged victim ever threatened or
tried to commit suicide?
Yes No
NOTES:
1 Please note that this checklist of lethality factors is not exhaustive. The listed factors are the ones most commonly present
when the risk of serious harm or death exists. The presence of these factors can indicate elevated risk of serious injury or
lethality. The absence of these factors is not, however, evidence of the absence of risk of lethality or evidence that any
particular judicial action (for example, granting an Order of Protection) should not be taken.RESTRAINING ORDERS CHEAT SHEET
EPO (Family Code 6240 et seq) DVPA (Family Code 6200 et seq)
EPOs may have enforcement precedence over other
restraining or protective orders. (Penal Code 136.2(e)(2))
Proof TRO: Reasonable proof of past act(s) of abuse (FC 6300)
OAH: Preponderance of evidence (Evidence Code 115)
Proof  Reasonable grounds to believe immediate &
present danger of DV, child abuse or abduction,
elder or dependent abuse, or stalking1
, and
 EPO is necessary to prevent occurrence or
recurrence of DV, child abuse or abduction, elder
or dependent abuse, or stalking.
(FC 6251, PC 646.91)
Abuse
6203
Action  Intentionally or recklessly cause/attempt to cause bodily injury, or
 Sexual assault, or
 Place person in reasonable apprehension of imminent serious
bodily injury to that person or another, or
 FC 6320(a) behavior that has been or could be enjoined: molest,
attack, strike, stalk1
, threaten, sexually assault, batter, credibly
impersonate another person2, falsely personate3, harass, telephone
(including but not limited to annoying telephone calls4), destroy
personal property, contact directly/indirectly by mail or otherwise,
come within specified distance, disturb peace
 Person in immediate & present danger of domestic
violence based on persons allegation of recent
abuse or threat of abuse (see FC 6203 for
definition of abuse) (FC 6250(a)), or
 Child in immediate & present danger of abuse by
family or household member based on allegation
of recent abuse or threat of abuse (FC6250(b)) or
 Child in immediate & present danger of abduction
by parent or relative based reasonable belief that
person has intent to abduct or flee jurisdiction or
on allegation of recent threat to abduct or flee
jurisdiction (FC 6250(c)), or
 Elder or dependent adult in immediate & present
danger of WIC 15610.07 abuse based on
allegation of recent abuse or threat of abuse. (FC
6250d) (No EPO for financial abuse only), or
 Person in immediate danger of stalking1 based on
allegation that s/he has been willfully,
maliciously, & repeatedly followed or harassed by
another person who has made credible threat with
intent to place person in reasonable fear for
his/her safety or safety of immediately family
(PC 646.91; FC 6274), or
 School/campus peace officer asserts reasonable
grounds to believe there is demonstrated threat to
campus safety, if MOU in place (FC 6250.5)
Required
Relationship
Per FC 6211, domestic violence is abuse against:
 Spouse or former spouse, or
 Cohabitant/former cohabitant5 FC6209, or
 Current or former dating/engagement partner6 6210 or
 Party with whom person has child(ren), or
 Child of party or child subject to paternity action, or
 Consanguinity or affinity to 2nd degree (parents,
grandparents, siblings, children)
Who Can Be
Protected
Petitioner; for good cause, other named family or household
members (FC6320a)
Minor 12, older needs no GAL (FC 6301a, CCP372(b)(1))
Orders Ex Parte TRO OAH
Required
Relationship
for EPO
Based on
Domestic
Violence
Per FC6211 domestic violence is abuse vs:
 Spouse/former spouse, or
 Cohabitant/former cohabitant5 FC6209 or
 Dating/engagement partner6 (current or
former) FC 6210, or
 Party with whom person has child(ren), or
 Child of party or child subject to paternity
action, or
 Consanguinity or affinity to 2nd degree
(parents, grandparents, siblings, children) Mutual
Orders
Not allowed unless 1) both parties personally appear, 2) both
present written evidence of abuse, and 3) court makes detailed
findings of fact that both acted primarily as aggressors & neither
acted primarily in self-defense. (FC 6305)
 Personal conduct (6320 (a))
 No contact; stay away (6320 (a))
 Animals: care, stay away, personal conduct
towards animal (6320 (b))
 Residence exclusion (6321)
 Other restraints necessary to effectuate
courts orders (6322)
 Prohibit getting address (6322.7)
 Firearms/ammunition (6389)
 Temporary custody & visitation (6323,
6346)
 Temporary property use/ possession, debt
payment (6324)
 Prohibit insurance changes (6325.5)
 Parentage by stipulation (6323(b)(2))
 All ex parte
orders (6340(a))
 Child support
(6341a)
 Spousal support
(6341c)
 Restitution for
loss of earnings
& out-of-pocket
expenses (6342)
 Batterers
intervention
program (6343)
 Attorneys fees &
costs (6344)
Who Can Be Protected Person & child(ren) in danger
Orders  Personal conduct (FC 6252(a), 6218(a), 6320)
 Stay away (FC 6252(a), 6218(a), 6320)
 Residence exclusion (FC 6252(a), 6218(b),
6321)
 Temporary care/control of child (FC 6252(b))
 Temp care/control of endangered child or other
children in home (FC 6252(c), W&I 213.5)
 Temporary care/control of child in danger of
abduction (FC 6252(d))
 WIC 15657.03 orders; protect elders or
dependent adults (6252(e))
Duration 21 days, or
25 days if good cause (FC 242)
Re-issuance: until the date of the
hearing (FC 245)
Child support survives even if
stipulation to drop TRO (6340(a)).
Not more than 5 years for
protective orders, firearms
(6345(a)); custody/
support/ visitation orders
survive expiration of RO
(6340(a)). If order is
silent, 3 years.
Notice
(243)
Ex parte TRO: personal service at least 5 days before hearing (b)
Response: at least 2 days before hearing (f)
Renewal: personal service at least 5 days before hearing
Continuance Respondent gets one continuance upon request, for
reasonable time to respond (FC 243(d));
Petitioner not entitled to continuance unless response served
less than 2 days before hearing. (FC 243(a) & (f))
Duration Earlier of (a) close of business on 5th court day
after day of issuance or (b) 7th calendar day
following day of issuance. (FC 6256)
Modification Personally serve protected party at least 16 days in advance
of hearing (CCP 1005) to terminate or modify restraining
order prior to expiration date; may waive notice. (6345(d))
Notice Police personally serves respondent if can locate, &
gives copy to protected party. (FC 6271)
Renewal CLETS Law enforcement officer shall enter EPO into DOJ
database (6271(d)).
5 years or permanently, filed within 3 months before expiration of
order, without showing of further abuse since issuance of original
order. (6345(a)) See Avalos v. Perez (2011) 196 CA 4th 773,
and Loeffler v. Medina (2009) 174 CA 4th 1495.
Fees Filing: No fee for petition or response. (FC 6222)
Service: No fee for service from sheriff.
Priorities for
Enforcement
Fam Code
6405(b)
 If more than one order and one is EPO: EPO to be enforced (Penal Code 136.2(e)(2)).
 If more than one order (but no EPO), and one is no-contact order: no-contact order to be enforced.
 If both civil and criminal orders (but no EPO and no no-contact order): criminal order issued last to be enforced.
 If more than one civil order (but no EPO and no no-contact order): order issued last to be enforced.
Hon. Shawna Schwarz sschwarz@scscourt.org Superior Court of Santa Clara County May 2015 v.4.4Civil Harassment (CCP 527.6) Workplace Violence (CCP  527.8)
Proof TRO: Reasonable proof of harassment by respondent, and
great or irreparable harm would result to petitioner
(527.6(d))
Injunction: Clear & convincing evidence (527.6(i))
TRO: Reasonable proof of unlawful violence or credible
threat of violence by respondent, and great or irreparable
harm would result to employee (527.8(e))
Injunction: Clear & convincing evidence (527.8(j))
Action Petitioner has suffered harassment (527.6(b)(3)):
 Unlawful violence  assault, battery, or stalking2; not
lawful self defense or defense of others (527.6(b)(7)), or
 Credible threat of violence  knowing & willful
statement or course of conduct that would place
reasonable person in fear for self or immediate family,
and serves no legitimate purpose, 527.6(b)(2), or
 Knowing & willful course of conduct directed at specific
person that seriously alarms, annoys, or harasses person
& that serves no legitimate purpose (527.6(b)(3))
Course of conduct is pattern of conduct composed
of series of acts over period of time, however short,
evidencing continuity of purpose (527.6(b)(1))
Conduct would cause reasonable person to suffer
substantial emotional distress, & actually caused
petitioner substantial emotional distress (527.6(b)(3))
Who Can
Petition
No relationship between petitioner & respondent required.
Minor under 12 needs CCP 374 GAL (527.6(a)(2))
Minor 12 and older does not need GAL (CCP372(b)(1)(A))
Who Can Be
Protected
Mutual Orders Orders Duration Notice Renewal Employee has suffered unlawful act of violence or credible
threat of violence from any person that can be reasonably
construed to be carried out or to have been carried out at
workplace (527.8(a))
 Credible threat of violence  knowing & willful
statement or course of conduct that would place
reasonable person in fear for self or immediate family,
and serves no legitimate purpose, 527.8(b)(2).
 Course of conduct  pattern of conduct composed of
series of acts over time, however short, evidencing
continuity of purpose, including following or stalking
employee to/from workplace; entering workplace;
following employee during work hours; making
telephone calls to employee; sending correspondence by
any means, including, use of public, private or interoffice
mails, fax, or computer e-mail. (527.8(b)(1)
Employer files on behalf of employee (527.8(a)).
Employer/employee per Labor Code 350 (527.8(b)(3))
Minor 12 and older does not need GAL (CCP372(b)(1)(B))
Employee; for good cause, family or household members &
others employed at workplace or other workplaces
(527.8(d))
Respondent may file cross-petition. (527.6(h))
 Personal conduct & stay away orders (527.6(b)(6)(A)) & 527.8(b)(6)(A)), but not residence exclusion per Marquez-
Luque v. Marquez 192 Cal.App.3d 1513 (1987))
 Firearms/ammunition: no own/possess; relinquish those owned (527.6(t), 527.8(r), 527.9 & Penal 29830)
 Attorneys fees/costs for prevailing party (specifically authorized in civil harassment only 527.6(r))
TRO: 21 days; 25 days if good cause (527.8(g) & (h))
Re-issuance: until date set for hearing (527.8(o)(1))
Injunction: not more than 3 years (527.8(k))
For not more than 5 years upon request of party, w/out
showing of further harassment since issuance of original
order; brought w/in 3 months of expiration (527.6(j)(1))
Petitioner, and, for good cause, all family or household
members (527.6(c))
TRO: 21 days; 25 days if good cause (527.6(f) & (g))
Re-issuance: until date set for hearing (527.6(o)(1))
Injunction: not more than 5 years (527.6(j))
TRO: personal service at least 5 days before hearing (527.6(m) & 527.8(m))
Answer: any time up to date of hearing (If 11th hour service prejudices petitioner, continue hearing to cure prejudice).7
Modification/termination: Per CCP 1005, personal service on protected party at least 16 days before hearing to
terminate or modify restraining order before expiration date; protected party may waive notice (527.6(j)(3), 527.8(k)(3))
For not more than 3 years upon request of party, w/out showing
of further violence/threat of violence since issuance of original
order; brought w/in 3 months of expiration (527.8(k)(1))
Continuance Discretionary (CRC 3.1332). (527 says respondent gets 1 continuance but cases have not read 527 into other statutes.) 7
Fees Filing:  No filing fee for petition that alleges that respondent has 1) inflicted or threatened violence against petitioner/
employee, 2) stalked petitioner/employee, or 3) acted or spoken in manner that has placed petitioner/employee
in reasonable fear of violence. (527.6(w) & 527.8(v))
 No fee for filing response to petition alleging these acts. (527.6(w) & 527.8(v))
Service:  No fee for service by sheriff if 1) order based on stalking, or 2) order based on unlawful violence or credible
threat of violence. (527.6(x) & 527.8(w))
1 Credibly impersonate (Penal Code 528.5)
Knowingly and without consent credibly impersonates another actual person through or on website or by other electronic means for purpose of
harming, intimidating, threatening, or defrauding another person.
Credible if another person would reasonably believe, or did reasonably believe, that defendant was or is person who was impersonated.
Electronic means includes opening email account or account or profile on social networking website in another persons name.
2 Falsely personate (Penal Code 529)
Falsely personates in private or official capacity and in that assumed character, also:
o Becomes bail or surety for any party, or
o Verifies, publishes, acknowledges, or proves, in name of another person, any written instrument with intent that instrument may be recorded,
delivered or used as true, or
o Does any other act that subjects falsely personated party to be liable in suit or prosecution, or to pay any sum of money, or to incur any charge,
forfeiture, or penalty, or where benefit accrues to party personating
3 Stalking (Penal Code 646.9)
Willfully, maliciously & repeatedly following or willfully & maliciously harassing another person, and
Making credible threat with intent to place person in reasonable fear for his/her safety or safety of immediate family.
4 Harassing by phone (Penal Code 653m)
a. With intent to annoy: telephones or makes contact by means of electronic communication device, & addresses to or about other person any
obscene language or addresses to other person threat to inflict injury to person, property of person, or member of persons family, or
b. Makes repeated telephone calls or makes repeated contact by means of electronic communication device with intent to annoy other person at
residence, whether or not conversation ensues from call or electronic contact. Does not apply to calls/contacts made in good faith.
5Cohabitant (Family Code 6209)
Person who regularly resides in household; must be social unit, not roommates or sub lessees. (OKane v. Irvine, 47 CA4th 207 (1996))
6 Dating relationship (Family Code 6210)
Frequent, intimate association characterized by expectation of affection or sexual involvement independent of financial considerations.
7 For a copy of a research memorandum supporting this interpretation of the law, contact Hon. Shawna Schwarz at sschwarz@scscourt.org.JUVENILE RESTRAINING ORDERS CHEAT SHEET
Dependency Delinquency
Proof TRO: If related to domestic violence, reasonable proof of past acts of abuse. If not related to DV, reasonable proof of
harassment, unlawful violence or credible threat of violence, & great or irreparable harm would result to petitioner (WIC
213.5(a) & (b); FC 6300; CCP 527.6(d) & 527.8 (e))
OAH: If related to domestic violence, preponderance of evidence (Evid. Code 115). If not related to DV, clear &
convincing evidence (CCP 527.6(i) & 527.8(j))
When Can R.O.
Petition Be Filed
After 300 petition filed and until petition is dismissed or
dependency is terminated (WIC 213.5a; CRC 5.620(b))
After 601/602 petition filed and until petition is dismissed
or wardship terminated (WIC 213.5b; CRC 5.625(a))
How Can R.O.
Petition Be
Made
 Orally at any scheduled hearing (CRC 5.630(b)), or
 Written application must be submitted on form JV-245 (CRC 5.630(b)) or
 On courts own motion (WIC 304; CRC 5.630(b))
Who Can
Petition
Parent, child, guardian, social worker, probation officer, present caregiver of child, court-appointed special advocate,
representative of Indian tribe, or other with interest or relationship to child
Who Can Be
Protected
 Dependent or child subject to 300 petition (Juvenile
court has exclusive jurisdiction for restraining orders
regarding dependent children. WIC 213.5(a)) )
 Other children in household (Juvenile court has
exclusive jurisdiction for restraining orders regarding
children in home of dependent children.
WIC213.5(a))
 Parent, legal guardian or current caregiver of child,
whether or not child resides with parent, legal
guardian or current caregiver
 Current or former social worker
 Current or former court appointed special advocate
(WIC 213.5(a); CRC 5.630(c) & (d))
 Ward or child subject to 601/602 petition
 Other children in household
 Parent, legal guardian or current caregiver of child,
whether or not child resides with parent, legal guardian
or current caregiver
 Current or former probation officer
 Current or former court appointed special advocate
If restrained party is ward or subject to 601/602 petition:
 Any person court finds to be at risk from conduct of child
 Any person with whom association with child would be
detrimental to child
(WIC 213.5(b); CRC 5.630(c) & (d))
Who Can Be
Restrained
 Any person  Any person
 Ward or child subject to  601/602 petition
Hearings  Application may be heard simultaneously with any scheduled hearing (WIC 213.5(c) & CRC 5.630(h)(1))
 Proof at hearing may be by application and attachments, additional declarations or documentary evidence, contents of
juvenile court file, testimony, or any combination (CRC 5.630(h)(2))
 Order must be prepared on Restraining Order  Juvenile form (JV-250) (CRC 5.620(b), 5.625(a), 5.630(h)(3))
Orders /
Enjoined
Actions
 Do not molest, attack, strike, stalk, threaten, sexually assault, batter, harass, telephone (including, but not limited to,
making annoying calls as described in Penal Code 635m), destroy personal property, contact (either directly or
indirectly, by mail or otherwise), come within specific distance or, or disturb peace of (WIC 213.5(a))
 Enjoin any person from behavior as necessary to effectuate courts orders (CRC 5.630(3)(3))
 Exclude any person from dwelling of person who has care, custody, control of child (WIC 213.5(a), (b) & (e))
(Juvenile court has exclusive jurisdiction for residence exclusion orders regarding dependents. WIC 213.5(a))
 Do not take any action to get address/location of protected person/family members/caregivers/guardians WIC 213.7
 Do not use/own/possess any guns/firearms/ammunition; relinquish those in or subject to immediate possession or
control within 72 hours of receiving order (Fam Code 6389)
 Enjoin delinquent child or child subject to 601/602
petition: do not contact, threaten, stalk, or disturb peace
of any person 1) whom court finds to be at risk from
conduct of child; or 2) with whom association would be
detrimental to child (WIC 213.5(b); CRC 5.630(e))
Requirements
for Residence
Exclusion Order
Court may exclude person from dwelling of person who has care/custody/control of child, regardless of which party
holds legal or equitable title or is lessee, on showing that:
 Party who will stay in dwelling has right under color of law to possession of premises; and
 Party to be excluded has assaulted or threatened to assault other party or any other person under care, custody, and
control of other party, or any minor child of party or of other party; and
 Physical or emotional harm would otherwise result to other party, to any person under care, custody, and control of
the other party, or any minor child of the party or of the other party.
(WIC 213.5(e); CRC 5.630(e)(2))
Duration Ex Parte TRO: 21 days; 25 days if good cause (WIC 213.5(c); CRC 5.630(g))
Re-issuance: in effect until the date set for the hearing (WIC 213.5(c); CRC 5.630(g))
Order After Hearing: no more than 3 years (WIC 213.5(d); CRC 5.630(h))
Termination &
Renewal
May be terminated by court before expiration date; or extended by mutual consent of all parties to restraining orders; or
extended by further order of court on motion by any party to restraining order. (WIC  213.5(d); CRC 5.630(j))
Violation Willful and knowing violation is misdemeanor, punishable under Penal Code 273.65 (WIC 213.5(h); CRC 5.630(k))
Notice TRO: may be granted ex parte (CCP  527(c); CRC 5.630(f))
Hearing: personal service sooner of: within 5 days of TRO being granted or 2 days before hearing (CCP  527(d)(2))
Continuance Per CCP  527(d)(4), restrained party entitled to one continuance.
Priorities for
Enforcement
Fam Code
6405(b)
 If more than one order and one is EPO: EPO to be enforced (Penal Code 136.2(e)(2)).
 If more than one order (but no EPO), and one is no-contact order: no-contact order to be enforced.
 If both civil and criminal orders (but no EPO and no no-contact order): criminal order issued last to be enforced.
 If more than one civil order (but no EPO and no no-contact order): order issued last to be enforced.
Hon. Shawna Schwarz sschwarz@scscourt.org Superior Court of Santa Clara County January 2015 v.2.3Rule 19 - Court Communication Protocol For Domestic Violence and Child Custody
Orders; Modifications of Criminal Protective Orders; Referrals from Criminal to
Unified Family Court; Procedures in Juvenile and Probate Courts
19.0 Statement of Principles And Goals.
A. This protocol is adopted to reflect the joint goals of protecting all victims of
domestic violence and promoting the best interests of children. Exposure to
violence within the home and between parents can result in long term emotional
and behavioral damage to minor children. Severing all contact between an
offending parent and the children may exacerbate the harm and not be in the best
interests of the children or family unit. The Unified Family Court has programs
and services, such as supervised visitation and parenting education programs, that
enable children to have visitation with an offending parent in a safe and
constructive setting. At the discretion of the Judge presiding over a domestic
violence criminal case, a referral can be made to the Unified Family Court giving
the latter Court the authority to modify a criminal protective order as to minor
children.
B. This protocol recognizes the statutory preference given to criminal protective
orders. Such orders will not be modified by the Unified Family Court unless
specifically authorized by the Judge in the criminal proceeding.
C. A plea or conviction of domestic violence in the Criminal Division triggers the
presumption regarding physical and legal custody set forth in Family Code 3044.
D. Services and programs are available through the Unified Family Court to provide
and facilitate safe parent-child contact and assist people in providing violence free
parenting to their children.
E. Courts hearing cases involving child custody and visitation will take every action
practicable to ensure that they are aware of the existence of any protective orders
involving the parties to the action currently before them.
19.1 Procedure in Criminal Court.
A. When the Criminal Court does or has issued a protective order from the minor
children of the defendant:
1. The Court may, at the Judges discretion:
a. Allow the protective order, as to the minor children, to be modified
by the Unified Family Court;
b. Mail a copy of its order to the Unified Family Court Case
Manager. A copy of the order shall be given to the defendant andthe victim by the Criminal Court;
c. Advise the defendant and victim that the Unified Family Court
may be able to provide services that will assist them in meeting the
needs of their children in a safe and supportive way and advise the
defendant and victim of the right to seek visitation through the
Unified Family Court; and
d. Provide the defendant with the Judicial/Information letter which
shall inform the defendant the protective order, with respect to the
minor children, will not be modified unless he or she files a motion
Local Rules of Court San Francisco Superior Court Rule 19
Effective: July 1, 1998; Revised: January 1, 2014 171
and participates in all programs required by the Unified Family
Court. The Information letter will also advise defendant that the
Unified Family Court will be informed of all court dates in the
criminal department and any violations of the protective order or
other probation conditions.
2. The District Attorneys Office will:
a. Provide the victim with the Information letter; and
b. Advise the victim of the right to seek a restraining order, child
support and supervised visitation through the Unified Family
Court.
3. Upon receipt of the Unified Family Court orders, the Criminal Court shall
either give the order to the appropriate department (if there is a future
date) or place the order in the case file (if the case has been adjudicated).
B. At Other Hearings: The Criminal Court will inform the Unified Family Court of
any changes in Court orders, violations of probation.
19.2 Procedure in Unified Family Court.
A. The Court will:
1. Set all cases referred from the Criminal Court on the Domestic Violence
Calendar;
2. Include the criminal case number as a cross-reference on all orders that
result in a modification of the criminal protective order;
3. Specify the fact, on any Visitation Order, that the criminal protective order
is being modified and have the order registered on the CLETS network;
4. Schedule periodic appearances for progress reports.
B. Family Court Services will:
1. Provide a parent orientation program specific to domestic violence issues;
2. Provide mediation services to the parents in conformance with safe
practices in domestic violence cases; and3. Provide a referral to Parenting Without Violence education program that
highlights the effects of domestic violence on children, if appropriate.
C. The Unified Family Court Case Manager will:
1. Track Unified Family Court hearings involving custody and visitation
issues and cross-reference orders from both the Criminal Court and
Unified Family Court;
2. Send a copy of Unified Family Court orders to the Adult Probation
Department and to the Criminal Court; and;
3. Assist both parents in accessing the following services when ordered by
the Court:
a. Parent Orientation
b. Mediation
c. Supervised Visitation
d. Parent Education
e. Child Trauma Project
f. SafeStart
g. Family Law Facilitator (when there are child support issues).
Local Rules of Court San Francisco Superior Court Rule 19
Effective: July 1, 1998; Revised: January 1, 2014 172
D. Self-Help Center will:
1. Provide legal assistance to both Defendant and or Victim, to properly
place the matter on calendar.
2. Include a copy of the protective order in Criminal Proceedings in the
motion with all requests to modify a criminal protective order.
19.3 Procedure in Juvenile Dependency Court.
A. The San Francisco HSA will:
1. Perform a search for criminal and civil court protective orders involving a
prospective custodian when filing a dependency petition and
recommending a minors change of custody to that person;
2. The HSA must not place a minor with a prospective custodian who is
restrained by a protective order, but must inform the Dependency Court of
the existence and terms of the protective order.
19.4 Procedure in Juvenile Delinquency Court.
A. The San Francisco Juvenile Probation Department will:
1. Perform a search for criminal and civil court protective orders involving a
prospective custodian other than the minors regular legal custodian before
releasing a minor to that person.2. The Juvenile Probation Department must not release a minor to a
prospective custodian who is restrained by a protective order, but must
inform the Delinquency Court of the existence and terms of the protective
order.
19.5 Procedure in Probate Court. The Probate Court will cross check petitions for probate
guardianship for cases in juvenile and family court. The Probate Court will also search
for criminal and civil protective orders involving the proposed guardian and other adults
living in the proposed guardians household.
Rule 19 adopted January 1, 2005.