CODE OF GEORGIA
Title 19. DOMESTIC RELATIONS
Chapter 6. ALIMONY AND CHILD SUPPORT
GENERALLY
Current through 2014 legislative session
ยง 19-6-15. Child Support in Final Verdict or Decree;
Computation of Award; Guidelines for Determining
Amount of Award; Continuation of Duty to Provide
Support; Duration of Support
(a)
Definitions. As used in this Code section, the term:
(1)
Reserved.
(2)
"Adjusted Income" means the determination of a Parent's
monthly income, calculated by deducting from that
Parent's monthly Gross Income one-half of the amount of
any applicable self-employment taxes being paid by the
Parent, any Preexisting Order for current child support
which is being paid by the Parent, and any Theoretical
Child Support Order for other Qualified Children, if
allowed by the Court. For further reference see paragraph
(5) of subsection (f) of this Code section.
(3)
'Basic child support obligation' means the monthly
amount of support displayed on the child support
obligation table which corresponds to the combined
adjusted income and the number of children for whom
child support is being determined.
(4)
"Child" means child or children.
(5)
Reserved.
(6)
'Child support obligation table' means the chart in
subsection (o) of this Code section.
(6.1)
"Child support services" means the agency within the
Department of Human Services which provides and
administers child support services.
(7)
"Combined Adjusted Income" means the amount of
Adjusted Income of the Custodial Parent added to the
amount of Adjusted Income of the Noncustodial Parent.
(8)
"Court" means a judge of any Court of record or an
administrative law judge of the Office of State
Administrative Hearings.
(9)
"Custodial Parent" means the Parent with whom the
Child resides more than 50 percent of the time. Where a
Custodial Parent has not been designated or where a
Child resides with both Parents an equal amount of time,
the Court shall designate the Custodial Parent as the
Parent with the lesser support obligation and the other
Parent as the Noncustodial Parent. Where the Child
resides equally with both Parents and neither Parent can
be determined as owing a greater amount than the other,
the Court shall determine which Parent to designate as
the Custodial Parent for the purpose of this Code section.
(10)
"Deviation" means an increase or decrease from the
Presumptive Amount of Child Support if the presumed
order is rebutted by evidence and the required findings of
fact are made by the Court pursuant to subsection (i) of
this Code section.
(11)
"Final Child Support Order" means the Presumptive
Amount of Child Support adjusted by any Deviations.
(12)
"Gross Income" means all income to be included in the
calculation of child support as set forth in subsection (f)
of this Code section.
(13)
"Health Insurance" means any general health or medical
policy. For further reference see paragraph (2) of
subsection (h) of this Code section.
(14)
"Noncustodial Parent" means the Parent with whom the
Child resides less than 50 percent of the time or the
Parent who has the greater payment obligation for child
support. Where the Child resides equally with bothParents and neither Parent can be determined as owing a
lesser amount than the other, the Court shall determine
which Parent to designate as the Noncustodial Parent for
the purpose of this Code section.
(15)
"Nonparent Custodian" means an individual who has
been granted legal custody of a Child, or an individual
who has a legal right to seek, modify, or enforce a child
support order.
(16)
"Parent" means a person who owes a Child a duty of
support pursuant to Code Section 19-7-2 .
(17)
"Parenting time deviation" means a deviation allowed for
the noncustodial parentbased upon the noncustodial
parent's court ordered visitation with the child. For
further reference see subsections (g) and (i) of this Code
section.
(18)
'Preexisting order' means:
(A)
An order in another case that requires a parent to make
child support payments for another child, which child
support the parent is actually paying, as evidenced by
documentation as provided in division (f)(5)(B)(iii) of
this Code section; and
(B)
That the date and time of filing with the clerk of court of
the initial order for each such other case is earlier than the
date and time of filing with the clerk of court of the initial
order in the case immediately before the court, regardless
of the age of any child in any of the cases.
(19)
"Presumptive Amount of Child Support" means the
Basic Child Support Obligation including Health
Insurance and Work Related Child Care Costs.
(20)
"Qualified Child" or "qualified children" means any
child:
(A)
For whom the parent is legally responsible and in whose
home the child resides;
(B)
That the parent is actually supporting;
(C)
Who is not subject to a preexisting order; and
(D)
Who is not before the court to set, modify, or enforce
support in the case immediately under consideration.
Qualified children shall not include stepchildren or other
minors in the home that the parent has no legal obligation
to support.
Qualified Children shall not include stepchildren or other
minors in the home that the Parent has no legal obligation
to support.
(21)
"Split Parenting" can occur in a child support case only
if there are two or more children of the same Parents,
where one Parent is the Custodial Parent for at least one
Child of the Parents, and the other Parent is the Custodial
Parent for at least one other Child of the Parents. In a
Split Parenting case, each Parent is the Custodial Parent
of any Child spending more than 50 percent of the time
with that Parent and is the Noncustodial Parent of any
Child spending more than 50 percent of the time with the
other Parent. A Split Parenting situation shall have two
Custodial Parents and two Noncustodial Parents, but no
Child shall have more than one Custodial Parent or
Noncustodial Parent.
(22)
"Theoretical Child Support Order" means a hypothetical
child support order for Qualified Children calculated as
set forth in subparagraph (f)(5)(C) of this Code section
which allows the Court to determine the amount of child
support as if a child support order existed.
(23)
"Uninsured Health Care Expenses" means a Child's
uninsured medical expenses including, but not limited to,
Health Insurance copayments, deductibles, and such other
costs as are reasonably necessary for orthodontia, dental
treatment, asthma treatments, physical therapy, vision
care, and any acute or chronic medical or health problem
or mental health illness, including counseling and other
medical or mental health expenses, that are not covered
by insurance. For further reference see paragraph (3) of
subsection (h) of this Code section.
(24)
"Work Related Child Care Costs" means expenses for
the care of the Child for whom support is being
determined which are due to employment of either
Parent. In an appropriate case, the Court may consider the
child care costs associated with a Parent's job search orthe training or education of a Parent necessary to obtain a
job or enhance earning potential, not to exceed a
reasonable time as determined by the Court, if the Parent
proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the job
search, job training, or education will benefit the Child
being supported. The term shall be projected for the next
consecutive 12 months and averaged to obtain a monthly
amount. For further reference see paragraph (1) of
subsection (h) of this Code section.
(25)
'Worksheet' or 'child support worksheet' means the
document used to record information necessary to
determine and calculate monthly child support. For
further reference see subsection (m) of this Code section.
(b)
Process of calculating child support. Pursuant to this
Code section, the determination of monthly child support
shall be calculated as follows:
(1)
Determine the monthly gross income of both the
custodial parent and the noncustodial parent. Gross
income may include imputed income, if applicable. The
determination of monthly gross income shall be entered
on the Child Support Schedule A - Gross Income;
(2)
Adjust each parent's monthly gross income by deducting
the following from the parents' monthly gross income and
entering it on the Child Support Schedule B - Adjusted
Income if any of the following apply:
(A)
One-half of the amount of self-employment taxes;
(B)
Preexisting orders; and
(C)
Theoretical child support order for qualified children, if
allowed by the court;
(3)
Add each parent's adjusted income together ;
(4)
Locate the basic child support obligation by referring to
the child support obligation table. Using the figure closest
to the amount of the combined adjusted income, locate
the amount of the basic child support obligation . If the
combined adjusted income falls between the amounts
shown in the table, then the basic child support obligation
shall be based on the income bracket most closely
matched to the combined adjusted income. The basic
child support obligation amount stated in subsection (o)
of this Code section shall be rebuttably presumed to be
the appropriate amount of child support to be provided by
the custodial parent and the noncustodial parent prior to
consideration of health insurance, work related child care
costs, and deviations;
(5)
Calculate the pro rata share of the basic child support
obligation for the custodial parent and the noncustodial
parent by dividing the combined adjusted income into
each parent's adjusted income to arrive at each parent's
pro rata percentage of the basic child support obligation;
(6)
Find the adjusted child support obligation amount by
adding the additional expenses of the costs of health
insurance and work related child care costs, prorating
such expenses in accordance with each parent's pro rata
share of the obligation and adding such expenses to the
pro rata share of the basic child support obligation. The
monthly cost of health insurance premiums and work
related child care costs shall be entered on the Child
Support Schedule D - Additional Expenses. The pro rata
share of the monthly basic child support obligation and
the pro rata share of the combined additional expenses
shall be added together to create the monthly adjusted
child support obligation;
(7)
Determine the amount of child support for the custodial
parent and the noncustodial parent resulting in a monthly
sum certain payment due to the custodial parent by
assigning or deducting credit for actual payments for
health insurance and work related child care costs from
the basic child support obligation;
(8)
In accordance with subsection (i) of this Code section,
deviations subtracted from or added to the presumptive
amount of child support shall be applied, if applicable,
and if supported by the required findings of fact and
application of the best interest of the child standard. The
proposed deviations shall be entered on the Child Support
Schedule E - Deviations. In the court's or the jury's
discretion, deviations may include, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
(A)
High income;
(B)Low income;
(C)
Other health related insurance;
(D)
Life insurance;
(E)
Child and dependent care tax credit;
(F)
Travel expenses;
(G)
Alimony;
(H)
Mortgage;
(I)
Permanency plan or foster care plan;
(J)
Extraordinary expenses;
(K)
Parenting time; and
(L)
Nonspecific deviations;
(9)
Any benefits which the child receives under Title II of the
federal Social Security Act shall be applied against the
final child support order. The final child support amount
for each parent shall be entered on the child support
worksheet, together with the information from each of the
utilized schedules;
(10)
The parents shall allocate the uninsured health care
expenses which shall be based on the pro rata
responsibility of the parents or as otherwise ordered by
the court. Each parent's pro rata responsibility for
uninsured health care expenses shall be entered on the
child support worksheet; and
(11)
In a split parenting case, there shall be a separate
calculation and final child support order for each parent.
(c)
Applicability and required findings.
(1)
The child support guidelines contained in this Code
section are a minimum basis for determining the amount
of child support and shall apply as a rebuttable
presumption in all legal proceedings involving the child
support responsibility of a parent. This Code section shall
be used when the court enters a temporary or permanent
child support order in a contested or noncontested hearing
or order in a civil action filed pursuant to Code Section
19-13-4 . The rebuttable presumptive amount of child
support provided by this Code section may be increased
or decreased according to the best interest of the child for
whom support is being considered, the circumstances of
the parties, the grounds for deviation set forth in
subsection (i) of this Code section, and to achieve the
state policy of affording to children of unmarried parents,
to the extent possible, the same economic standard of
living enjoyed by children living in intact families
consisting of parents with similar financial means.
(2)
The provisions of this Code section shall not apply with
respect to any divorce case in which there are no minor
children, except to the limited extent authorized by
subsection (e) of this Code section. In the final judgment
or decree in a divorce case in which there are minor
children, or in other cases which are governed by the
provisions of this Code section, the court shall:
(A)
Specify in what sum certain amount and from which
parent the child is entitled to permanent support as
determined by use of the worksheet;
(B)
Specify as required by Code Section 19-5-12 in what
manner, how often, to whom, and until when the support
shall be paid;
(C)
Include a written finding of the parent's gross income as
determined by the court or the jury;
(D)
Determine whether health insurance for the child
involved is reasonably available at a reasonable cost to
either parent. If the health insurance is reasonably
available at a reasonable cost to the parent, then the court
shall order that the child be covered under such healthinsurance;
(E)
Include written findings of fact as to whether one or
more of the deviations allowed under this Code section
are applicable, and if one or more such deviations are
applicable as determined by the court or the jury, the
written findings of fact shall further set forth:
(i)
The reasons the court or the jury deviated from the
presumptive amount of child support;
(ii)
The amount of child support that would have been
required under this Code section if the presumptive
amount of child support had not been rebutted; and
(iii)
A finding that states how the court's or the jury's
application of the child support guidelines would be
unjust or inappropriate considering the relative ability of
each parent to provide support and how the best interest
of the child who is subject to the child support
determination is served by deviation from the
presumptive amount of child support;
(F)
Specify the amount of the noncustodial parent's
parenting time as set forth in the order of visitation;
(G)
Include a written finding regarding the use of benefits
received under Title II of the federal Social Security Act
in the calculation of the amount of child support; and
(H)
Specify the percentage of uninsured health care expenses
for which each parent shall be responsible.
(3)
When child support is ordered, the party who is required
to pay the child support shall not be liable to third
persons for necessaries furnished to the child embraced in
the judgment or decree.
(4)
In all cases, the parties shall submit to the court their
worksheets and schedules and the presence or absence of
other factors to be considered by the court pursuant to the
provisions of this Code section.
(5)
In any case in which the gross income of the custodial
parent and the noncustodial parent is determined by a
jury, the court shall charge the provisions of this Code
section applicable to the determination of gross income.
The jury shall be required to return a special interrogatory
determining gross income. The court shall determine
adjusted income, health insurance costs, and work related
child care costs. Based upon the jury's verdict as to gross
income, the court shall determine the presumptive
amount of child support in accordance with the
provisions of this Code section. The court shall inform
the jury of the presumptive amount of child support and
the identity of the custodial and noncustodial parents. In
the final instructions to the jury, the court shall charge the
provisions of this Code section applicable to the
determination of deviations and the jury shall be required
to return a special interrogatory as to deviations and the
final award of child support. The court shall include its
findings and the jury's verdict on the child support
worksheet in accordance with this Code section and Code
Section 19-5-12 .
(6)
Nothing contained within this Code section shall prevent
the parties from entering into an enforceable agreement
contrary to the presumptive amount of child support
which may be made the order of the court pursuant to
review by the court of the adequacy of the child support
amounts negotiated by the parties, including the provision
for medical expenses and health insurance; provided,
however, that if the agreement negotiated by the parties
does not comply with the provisions contained in this
Code section and does not contain findings of fact as
required to support a deviation, the court shall reject such
agreement.
(7)
In any case filed pursuant to Chapter 11 of this title,
relating to the "Child Support Recovery Act,
" the
"Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act,
" or
the "Uniform Interstate Family Support Act,
" the court
shall make all determinations of fact, including gross
income and deviations, and a jury shall not hear any issue
related to such cases.
(d)
Nature of guidelines; Court's discretion. In the event of a
hearing or trial on the issue of child support, the
guidelines enumerated in this Code section are intended
by the General Assembly to be guidelines only and any
Court so applying these guidelines shall not abrogate its
responsibility in making the final determination of child
support based on the evidence presented to it at the time
of the hearing or trial.
(e)
Duration of child support responsibility. The duty toprovide support for a minor Child shall continue until the
Child reaches the age of majority, dies, marries, or
becomes emancipated, whichever first occurs; provided,
however, that, in any temporary, final, or modified order
for child support with respect to any proceeding for
divorce, separate maintenance, legitimacy, or paternity
entered on or after July 1, 1992, the Court, in the exercise
of sound discretion, may direct either or both Parents to
provide financial assistance to a Child who has not
previously married or become emancipated, who is
enrolled in and attending a secondary school, and who
has attained the age of majority before completing his or
her secondary school education, provided that such
financial assistance shall not be required after a Child
attains 20 years of age. The provisions for child support
provided in this subsection may be enforced by either
Parent, by any Nonparent Custodian, by a guardian
appointed to receive child support for the Child for whose
benefit the child support is ordered, or by the Child for
whose benefit the child support is ordered.
(f)
Gross Income.
(1)
INCLUSION TO GROSS INCOME.
(A)
Attributable income. Gross income of each parent shall
be determined in the process of setting the presumptive
amount of child support and shall include all income from
any source, before deductions for taxes and other
deductions such as preexisting orders for child support
and credits for other qualified children, whether earned or
unearned, and includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
(i)
Salaries;
(ii)
Commissions, fees, and tips;
(iii)
Income from self-employment;
(iv)
Bonuses;
(v)
Overtime payments;
(vi)
Severance pay;
(vii)
Recurring income from pensions or retirement plans
including, but not limited to, United States Department of
Veterans Affairs, Railroad Retirement Board, Keoghs,
and individual retirement accounts;
(viii)
Interest income;
(ix)
Dividend income;
(x)
Trust income;
(xi)
Income from annuities;
(xii)
Capital gains;
(xiii)
Disability or retirement benefits that are received from
the Social Security Administration pursuant to Title II of
the federal Social Security Act;
(xiv)
Disability benefits that are received pursuant to the
federal Veterans' Benefits Act of 2010, 38 U.S.C. Section
101, et seq.;
(xv)
Workers' compensation benefits, whether temporary or
permanent;
(xvi)
Unemployment insurance benefits;
(xvii)
Judgments recovered for personal injuries and awards
from other civil actions;
(xviii)
Gifts that consist of cash or other liquid instruments, or
which can be converted to cash;
(xix)
Prizes;(xx)
Lottery winnings;
(xxi)
Alimony or maintenance received from persons other
than parties to the proceeding before the court;
(xxii)
Assets which are used for the support of the family; and
(xxiii)
Other income.
(B)
SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME. Income from
self-employment includes income from, but not limited
to, business operations, work as an independent
contractor or consultant, sales of goods or services, and
rental properties, less ordinary and reasonable expenses
necessary to produce such income. Income from
self-employment, rent, royalties, proprietorship of a
business, or joint ownership of a partnership, limited
liability company, or closely held corporation is defined
as gross receipts minus ordinary and reasonable expenses
required for self-employment or business operations.
Ordinary and reasonable expenses of self-employment or
business operations necessary to produce income do not
include:
(i)
Excessive promotional, travel, vehicle, or personal living
expenses, depreciation on equipment, or costs of
operation of home offices; or
(ii)
Amounts allowable by the Internal Revenue Service for
the accelerated component of depreciation expenses,
investment tax credits, or any other business expenses
determined by the court or the jury to be inappropriate for
determining gross income. In general, income and
expenses from self-employment or operation of a
business should be carefully reviewed by the court or the
jury to determine an appropriate level of gross income
available to the parent to satisfy a child support
obligation. Generally, this amount will differ from a
determination of business income for tax purposes.
(C)
FRINGE BENEFITS. Fringe benefits for inclusion as
income or "in kind" remuneration received by a parent in
the course of employment, or operation of a trade or
business, shall be counted as income if the benefits
significantly reduce personal living expenses. Such fringe
benefits might include, but are not limited to, use of a
company car, housing, or room and board. Fringe
benefits shall not include employee benefits that are
typically added to the salary, wage, or other
compensation that a parent may receive as a standard
added benefit, including, but not limited to, employer
paid portions of health insurance premiums or employer
contributions to a retirement or pension plan.
(D)
VARIABLE INCOME. Variable income such as
commissions, bonuses, overtime pay, military bonuses,
and dividends shall be averaged by the court or the jury
over a reasonable period of time consistent with the
circumstances of the case and added to a parent's fixed
salary or wages to determine gross income. When income
is received on an irregular, nonrecurring, or one-time
basis, the court or the jury may, but is not required to,
average or prorate the income over a reasonable specified
period of time or require the parent to pay as a one-time
support amount a percentage of his or her nonrecurring
income, taking into consideration the percentage of
recurring income of that parent.
(E)
MILITARY COMPENSATION AND ALLOWANCES.
Income for a parent who is an active duty member of the
regular or reserve component of the United States armed
forces, the United States Coast Guard, the merchant
marine of the United States, the commissioned corps of
the Public Health Service or the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, the National Guard, or the
Air National Guard shall include:
(i)
Base pay;
(ii)
Drill pay;
(iii)
Basic allowance for subsistence, whether paid directly to
the parent or received in-kind; and
(iv)
Basic allowance for housing, whether paid directly to the
parent or received in-kind, determined at the parent's pay
grade at the without dependent rate, but shall include only
so much of the allowance that is not attributable to area
variable housing costs.
Except as determined by the court or jury, special pay or
incentive pay, allowances for clothing or family
separation, and reimbursed expenses related to the
parent's assignment to a high cost of living location shall
not be considered income for the purpose of determininggross income.
(2)
EXCLUSIONS FROM GROSS INCOME. Excluded
from gross income are the following:
(A)
Child support payments received by either parent for the
benefit of a child of another relationship;
(B)
Benefits received from means-tested public assistance
programs such as, but not limited to:
(i)
PeachCare for Kids Program, Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families Program, or similar programs in other
states or territories under Title IV-A of the federal Social
Security Act;
(ii)
Food stamps or the value of food assistance provided by
way of electronic benefits transfer procedures by the
Department of Human Services;
(iii)
Supplemental security income received under Title XVI
of the federal Social Security Act;
(iv)
Benefits received under Section 402(d) of the federal
Social Security Act for disabled adult children of
deceased disabled workers; and
(v)
Low-income heating and energy assistance program
payments;
(C)
Foster care payments paid by the Department of Human
Services or a licensed child placing agency for providing
foster care to a foster child in the custody of the
Department of Human Services; and
(D)
A nonparent custodian's gross income.
(3)
SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS.
(A)
Benefits received under Title II of the federal Social
Security Act by a child on the obligor's account shall be
counted as child support payments and shall be applied
against the final child support order to be paid by the
obligor for the child.
(B)
After calculating the obligor's monthly gross income,
including the countable social security benefits as
specified in division (1)(A)(xiii) of this subsection, and
after calculating the amount of child support, if the
presumptive amount of child support, as increased or
decreased by deviations, is greater than the social security
benefits paid on behalf of the child on the obligor's
account, the obligor shall be required to pay the amount
exceeding the social security benefit as part of the final
child support order in the case.
(C)
After calculating the obligor's monthly gross income,
including the countable social security benefits as
specified in division (1)(A)(xiii) of this subsection, and
after calculating the amount of child support, if the
presumptive amount of child support, as increased or
decreased by deviations, is equal to or less than the social
security benefits paid to the nonparent custodian or
custodial parent on behalf of the child on the obligor's
account, the child support responsibility of that parent
shall have been met and no further child support shall be
paid.
(D)
Any benefit amounts under Title II of the federal Social
Security Act as determined by the Social Security
Administration sent to the nonparent custodian or
custodial parent by the Social Security Administration for
the child's benefit which are greater than the final child
support order shall be retained by the nonparent custodian
or custodial parent for the child's benefit and shall not be
used as a reason for decreasing the final child support
order or reducing arrearages.
(4)
RELIABLE EVIDENCE OF INCOME.
(A)
IMPUTED INCOME. When establishing the amount of
child support, if a Parent fails to produce reliable
evidence of income, such as tax returns for prior years,
check stubs, or other information for determining current
ability to pay child support or ability to pay child support
in prior years, and the Court or the jury has no other
reliable evidence of the Parent's income or income
potential, Gross Income for the current year shall be
determined by imputing Gross Income based on a 40hour workweek at minimum wage.
(B)
MODIFICATION. When cases with established orders
are reviewed for modification and a parent fails to
produce reliable evidence of income, such as tax returns
for prior years, check stubs, or other information for
determining current ability to pay child support or ability
to pay child support in prior years, and the court or jury
has no other reliable evidence of such parent's income or
income potential, the court or jury may increase the child
support of the parent failing or refusing to produce
evidence of income by an increment of at least 10 percent
per year of such parent's gross income for each year since
the final child support order was entered or last modified
and shall calculate the basic child support obligation
using the increased amount as such parent's gross income.
(C)
Rehearing. If income is imputed pursuant to
subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, the party believing
the income of the other party is higher than the amount
imputed may provide within 90 days, upon motion to the
court, evidence necessary to determine the appropriate
amount of child support based upon reliable evidence. A
hearing shall be scheduled after the motion is filed. The
court may increase, decrease, or leave unchanged the
amount of current child support from the date of filing of
either parent's initial filing or motion for reconsideration.
While the motion for reconsideration is pending, the
obligor shall be responsible for the amount of child
support originally ordered. Arrearages entered in the
original child support order based upon imputed income
shall not be forgiven. When there is reliable evidence to
support a motion for reconsideration of the amount of
income imputed, the party seeking reconsideration shall
not be required to prove the existence of grounds for
modification of an order pursuant to subsection (k) of this
Code section.
(D)
WILLFUL OR VOLUNTARY UNEMPLOYMENT OR
UNDEREMPLOYMENT. In determining whether a
Parent is willfully or voluntarily unemployed or
underemployed, the Court or the jury shall ascertain the
reasons for the Parent's occupational choices and assess
the reasonableness of these choices in light of the Parent's
responsibility to support his or her Child and whether
such choices benefit the Child. A determination of willful
or voluntary unemployment or underemployment shall
not be limited to occupational choices motivated only by
an intent to avoid or reduce the payment of child support
but can be based on any intentional choice or act that
affects a Parent's income. In determining willful or
voluntary unemployment or underemployment, the Court
may examine whether there is a substantial likelihood
that the Parent could, with reasonable effort, apply his or
her education, skills, or training to produce income.
Specific factors for the Court to consider when
determining willful or voluntary unemployment or
underemployment include, but are not limited to:
(i)
The Parent's past and present employment;
(ii)
The Parent's education and training;
(iii)
Whether unemployment or underemployment for the
purpose of pursuing additional training or education is
reasonable in light of the Parent's responsibility to
support his or her Child and, to this end, whether the
training or education may ultimately benefit the Child in
the case immediately under consideration by increasing
the Parent's level of support for that Child in the future;
(iv)
A Parent's ownership of valuable assets and resources,
such as an expensive home or automobile, that appear
inappropriate or unreasonable for the income claimed by
the Parent;
(v)
The Parent's own health and ability to work outside the
home; and
(vi)
The Parent's role as caretaker of a Child of that Parent, a
disabled or seriously ill Child of that Parent, or a disabled
or seriously ill adult Child of that Parent, or any other
disabled or seriously ill relative for whom that Parent has
assumed the role of caretaker, which eliminates or
substantially reduces the Parent's ability to work outside
the home, and the need of that Parent to continue in the
role of caretaker in the future. When considering the
income potential of a Parent whose work experience is
limited due to the caretaker role of that Parent, the Court
shall consider the following factors:
(I)
Whether the Parent acted in the role of full-time
caretaker immediately prior to separation by the married
parties or prior to the divorce or annulment of the
marriage or dissolution of another relationship in which
the Parent was a full-time caretaker;
(II)
The length of time the Parent staying at home has
remained out of the work force for this purpose;(III)
The Parent's education, training, and ability to work; and
(IV)
Whether the Parent is caring for a Child who is four
years of age or younger. If the Court or the jury
determines that a Parent is willfully or voluntarily
unemployed or underemployed, child support shall be
calculated based on a determination of earning capacity,
as evidenced by educational level or previous work
experience. In the absence of any other reliable evidence,
income may be imputed to the Parent pursuant to a
determination that Gross Income for the current year is
based on a 40 hour workweek at minimum wage. A
determination of willful and voluntary unemployment or
underemployment shall not be made when an individual
is activated from the National Guard or other armed
forces unit or enlists or is drafted for full-time service in
the armed forces of the United States.
(5)
ADJUSTMENTS TO GROSS INCOME.
(A)
Self-employment. One-half of the self-employment and
Medicare taxes shall be calculated as follows:
(i)
Six and two-tenths percent of self-employment income
up to the maximum amount to which federal old age,
survivors, and disability insurance (OASDI) applies; plus
(ii)
One and forty-five one-hundredths of a percent of
self-employment income for Medicare and this amount
shall be deducted from a self-employed Parent's monthly
Gross Income.
(B)
Preexisting orders. An adjustment to the parent's
monthly gross income shall be made on the Child
Support Schedule B - Adjusted Income for current
preexisting orders for a period of not less than 12 months
immediately prior to the date of the hearing or such
period that an order has been in effect if less than 12
months prior to the date of the hearing before the court to
set, modify, or enforce child support.
(i)
In calculating the adjustment for preexisting orders, the
court shall include only those preexisting orders meeting
the criteria set forth in subparagraph (a)(18)(B);
(ii)
The priority for preexisting orders shall be determined
by the date and time of filing with the clerk of court of
the initial order in each case. Subsequent modifications of
the initial support order shall not affect the priority
position established by the date and time of the initial
order. In any modification proceeding, the court
rendering the decision shall make a specific finding of the
date, and time if known, of the initial order of the case;
(iii)
Adjustments shall be allowed for current preexisting
support only to the extent that the payments are actually
being paid as evidenced by documentation including, but
not limited to, payment history from a court clerk, the
child support services' computer data base, the child
support payment history, or canceled checks or other
written proof of payments paid directly to the other
parent. The maximum credit allowed for a preexisting
order is an average of the amount of current support
actually paid under the preexisting order over the past 12
months prior to the hearing date;
(iv)
All preexisting orders shall be entered on the Child
Support Schedule B - Adjusted Income for the purpose of
calculating the total amount of the credit to be included
on the child support worksheet; and
(v)
Payments being made by a parent on any arrearages shall
not be considered payments on preexisting orders or
subsequent orders and shall not be used as a basis for
reducing gross income.
(C)
Theoretical Child Support Orders. In addition to the
adjustments to monthly Gross Income for
self-employment taxes provided in subparagraph (A) of
this paragraph and for Preexisting Orders provided in
subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, credits for either
Parent's other Qualified Child living in the Parent's home
for whom the Parent owes a legal duty of support may be
considered by the Court for the purpose of reducing the
Parent's Gross Income. To consider a Parent's other
Qualified Children for determining the Theoretical Child
Support Order, a Parent shall present documentary
evidence of the Parent-Child relationship to the Court.
Adjustments to income pursuant to this subparagraph
may be considered in such circumstances in which the
failure to consider a Qualified Child would cause
substantial hardship to the Parent; provided, however,
that such consideration of an adjustment shall be based
upon the best interest of the Child for whom child support
is being awarded. If the Court, in its discretion, decides to
apply the Qualified Child adjustment, the Basic ChildSupport Obligation of the Parent for the number of other
Qualified Children living with such Parent shall be
determined based upon that Parent's monthly Gross
Income. Except for self-employment taxes paid, no other
amounts shall be subtracted from the Parent's monthly
Gross Income when calculating a Theoretical Child
Support Order under this subparagraph. The Basic Child
Support Obligation for such Parent shall be multiplied by
75 percent and the resulting amount shall be subtracted
from such Parent's monthly Gross Income and entered on
the Child Support Schedule B Adjusted Income.
(D)
Multiple family situations. In multiple family situations,
the priority of adjustments to a parent's monthly gross
income shall be calculated in the following order:
(i)
Preexisting orders according to the date and time of the
initial order as set forth in subparagraph (B) of this
paragraph; and
(ii)
Application of any credit for a parent's other qualified
children using the procedure set forth in subparagraph (C)
of this paragraph.
(g)
Parenting time deviation. The court or the jury may
deviate from the presumptive amount of child support as
set forth in subparagraph (i)(2)(K) of this Code section.
(h)
Adjusted support obligation. The Child Support
Obligation Table does not include the cost of the Parent's
Work Related Child Care Costs, Health Insurance
premiums, or Uninsured Health Care Expenses. The
additional expenses for the child's health insurance
premium and Work Related Child Care Costs shall be
included in the calculations to determine child support. A
Nonparent Custodian's expenses for Work Related Child
Care Costs and Health Insurance premiums shall be taken
into account when establishing a Final Child Support
Order.
(1)
WORK RELATED CHILD CARE COSTS.
(A)
Work Related Child Care Costs necessary for the
Parent's employment, education, or vocational training
that are determined by the Court to be appropriate, and
that are appropriate to the Parents' financial abilities and
to the lifestyle of the Child if the Parents and Child were
living together, shall be averaged for a monthly amount
and entered on the Child Support Worksheet in the
column of the Parent initially paying the expense. Work
Related Child Care Costs of a Nonparent Custodian shall
be considered when determining the amount of this
expense.
(B)
If a child care subsidy is being provided pursuant to a
means-tested public assistance program, only the amount
of the child care expense actually paid by either Parent or
a Nonparent Custodian shall be included in the
calculation.
(C)
If either Parent is the provider of child care services to
the Child for whom support is being determined, the
value of those services shall not be an adjustment to the
Basic Child Support Obligation when calculating the
support award.
(D)
If child care is provided without charge to the Parent, the
value of these services shall not be an adjustment to the
Basic Child Support Obligation. If child care is or will be
provided by a person who is paid for his or her services,
proof of actual cost or payment shall be shown to the
Court before the Court includes such payment in its
consideration.
(E)
The amount of Work Related Child Care Costs shall be
determined and added as an adjustment to the Basic Child
Support Obligation as "additional expenses" whether paid
directly by the Parent or through a payroll deduction.
(F)
The total amount of Work Related Child Care Costs shall
be divided between the Parents pro rata to determine the
Presumptive Amount of Child Support and shall be
included in the Worksheet and written order of the Court.
(2)
COST OF HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUMS.
(A)
(i)
The amount that is, or will be, paid by a Parent for
Health Insurance for the Child for whom support is being
determined shall be an adjustment to the Basic Child
Support Obligation and prorated between the Parents
based upon their respective incomes. Payments made by
a Parent's employer for Health Insurance and not
deducted from the Parent's wages shall not be included.
When a Child for whom support is being determined iscovered by a family policy, only the Health Insurance
premium actually attributable to that Child shall be
added.
(ii)
The amount of the cost for the Child's Health Insurance
premium shall be determined and added as an adjustment
to the Basic Child Support Obligation as "additional
expenses" whether paid directly by the Parent or through
a payroll deduction.
(iii)
The total amount of the cost for the Child's Health
Insurance premium shall be divided between the Parents
pro rata to determine the total Presumptive Amount of
Child Support and shall be included in the Child Support
Schedule D Additional Expenses and written order of the
Court together with the amount of the Basic Child
Support Obligation.
(B)
(i)
If either parent has health insurance reasonably available
at reasonable cost that provides for the health care needs
of the child, then an amount to cover the cost of the
premium shall be added as an adjustment to the basic
child support obligation. A health insurance premium
paid by a nonparent custodian shall be included when
determining the amount of health insurance expense. In
determining the amount to be added to the order for the
health insurance cost, only the amount of the health
insurance cost attributable to the child who is the subject
of the order shall be included.
(ii)
If coverage is applicable to other persons and the amount
of the Health Insurance premium attributable to the Child
who is the subject of the current action for support is not
verifiable, the total cost to the Parent paying the premium
shall be prorated by the number of persons covered so
that only the cost attributable to the Child who is the
subject of the order under consideration is included. The
amount of Health Insurance premium shall be determined
by dividing the total amount of the insurance premium by
the number of persons covered by the insurance policy
and multiplying the resulting amount by the number of
children covered by the insurance policy. The monthly
cost of Health Insurance premium shall be entered on the
Child Support Schedule D Additional Expenses in the
column of the Parent paying the premium.
(iii)
Eligibility for or enrollment of the Child in Medicaid or
PeachCare for Kids Program shall not satisfy the
requirement that the Final Child Support Order provide
for the Child's health care needs. Health coverage through
PeachCare for Kids Program and Medicaid shall not
prevent a Court from ordering either or both Parents to
obtain other Health Insurance.
(3)
UNINSURED HEALTH CARE EXPENSES.
(A)
The Child's Uninsured Health Care Expenses shall be the
financial responsibility of both Parents. The Final Child
Support Order shall include provisions for payment of the
Uninsured Heath Care Expenses; provided, however, that
the Uninsured Health Care Expenses shall not be used for
the purpose of calculating the amount of child support.
The Parents shall divide the Uninsured Health Care
Expenses pro rata, unless otherwise specifically ordered
by the Court.
(B)
If a Parent fails to pay his or her pro rata share of the
Child's Uninsured Health Care Expenses, as specified in
the Final Child Support Order, within a reasonable time
after receipt of evidence documenting the uninsured
portion of the expense:
(i)
The other Parent or the Nonparent Custodian may
enforce payment of the expense by any means permitted
by law; or
(ii)
Child support services shall pursue enforcement of
payment of such unpaid expenses only if the unpaid
expenses have been reduced to a judgment in a sum
certain amount."
(i)
Grounds for Deviation.
(1)
General principles.
(A)
The amount of child support established by this Code
section and the presumptive amount of child support are
rebuttable and the court or the jury may deviate from the
presumptive amount of child support in compliance with
this subsection. In deviating from the presumptive
amount of child support, primary consideration shall be
given to the best interest of the child for whom support
under this Code section is being determined. A nonparent
custodian's expenses may be the basis for a deviation.(B)
When ordering a deviation from the presumptive amount
of child support, the court or the jury shall consider all
available income of the parents and shall make written
findings or special interrogatory findings that an amount
of child support other than the amount calculated is
reasonably necessary to provide for the needs of the child
for whom child support is being determined and the order
or special interrogatory shall state:
(i)
The reasons for the deviation from the presumptive
amount of child support;
(ii)
The amount of child support that would have been
required under this Code section if the presumptive
amount of child support had not been rebutted; and
(iii)
How, in its determination:
(I)
Application of the presumptive amount of child support
would be unjust or inappropriate; and
(II)
The best interest of the child for whom support is being
determined will be served by deviation from the
presumptive amount of child support.
(C)
No deviation in the presumptive amount of child support
shall be made which seriously impairs the ability of the
custodial parent to maintain minimally adequate housing,
food, and clothing for the child being supported by the
order and to provide other basic necessities, as
determined by the court or the jury.
(D)
If the circumstances which supported the deviation cease
to exist, the final child support order may be modified as
set forth in subsection (k) of this Code section to
eliminate the deviation.
(2)
SPECIFIC DEVIATIONS.
(A)
HIGH INCOME. For purposes of this subparagraph,
Parents are considered to be high-income Parents if their
Combined Adjusted Income exceeds $30,000.00 per
month. For high-income Parents, the Court shall set the
Basic Child Support Obligation at the highest amount
allowed by the Child Support Obligation Table but the
Court or the jury may consider upward Deviation to
attain an appropriate award of child support for
high-income Parents which is consistent with the best
interest of the Child.
(B)
Low income.
(i)
If the noncustodial parent can provide evidence
sufficient to demonstrate no earning capacity or that his
or her pro rata share of the presumptive amount of child
support would create an extreme economic hardship for
such parent, the court may consider a low-income
deviation.
(ii)
A noncustodial parent whose sole source of income is
supplemental security income received under Title XVI
of the federal Social Security Act shall be considered to
have no earning capacity.
(iii)
The court or the jury shall examine all attributable and
excluded sources of income, assets, and benefits available
to the noncustodial parent and may consider all
reasonable expenses of the noncustodial parent, ensuring
that such expenses are actually paid by the noncustodial
parent and are clearly justified expenses.
(iv)
In considering a request for a low-income deviation, the
court or the jury shall then weigh the income and all
attributable and excluded sources of income, assets, and
benefits and all reasonable expenses of each parent, the
relative hardship that a reduction in the amount of child
support paid to the custodial parent would have on the
custodial parent's household, the needs of each parent, the
needs of the child for whom child support is being
determined, and the ability of the noncustodial parent to
pay child support.
(v)
Following a review of the noncustodial parent's gross
income and expenses, and taking into account each
parent's basic child support obligation adjusted by health
insurance and work related child care costs and the
relative hardships on the parents and the child, the court
or the jury, upon request by either party or upon the
court's initiative, may consider a downward deviation to
attain an appropriate award of child support which is
consistent with the best interest of the child.(vi)
For the purpose of calculating a low-income deviation,
the noncustodial parent's minimum child support for one
child shall be not less than $100.00 per month, and such
amount shall be increased by at least $50.00 for each
additional child for the same case for which child support
is being ordered.
(vii)
A low-income deviation granted pursuant to this
subparagraph shall apply only to the current child support
amount and shall not prohibit an additional amount being
ordered to reduce a noncustodial parent's arrears.
(viii)
If a low-income deviation is granted pursuant to this
subparagraph, such deviation shall not prohibit the court
or jury from granting an increase or decrease to the
presumptive amount of child support by the use of any
other specific or nonspecific deviation.
(C)
OTHER HEALTH RELATED INSURANCE. If the
Court or the jury finds that either Parent has vision or
dental insurance available at a reasonable cost for the
Child, the Court may deviate from the Presumptive
Amount of Child Support for the cost of such insurance.
(D)
LIFE INSURANCE. In accordance with Code Section
19-6-34 , if the Court or the jury finds that either Parent
has purchased life insurance on the life of either Parent or
the lives of both Parents for the benefit of the Child, the
Court may deviate from the Presumptive Amount of
Child Support for the cost of such insurance by either
adding or subtracting the amount of the premium.
(E)
CHILD AND DEPENDENT CARE TAX CREDIT. If
the Court or the jury finds that one of the Parents is
entitled to the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit, the
Court or the jury may deviate from the Presumptive
Amount of Child Support in consideration of such credit.
(F)
TRAVEL EXPENSES. If court ordered visitation related
travel expenses are substantial due to the distance
between the Parents, the Court may order the allocation
of such costs or the jury may by a finding in its special
interrogatory allocate such costs by Deviation from the
Presumptive Amount of Child Support, taking into
consideration the circumstances of the respective Parents
as well as which Parent moved and the reason for such
move.
(G)
ALIMONY.Actual payments of alimony shall not be
considered as a deduction from gross income but may be
considered as a deviation from the presumptive amount
of child support. If the court or the jury considers the
actual payment of alimony, the court shall make a written
finding of such consideration or the jury, in its special
interrogatory, shall make a written finding of such
consideration as a basis for deviation from the
presumptive amount of child support.
(H)
MORTGAGE. If the Noncustodial Parent is providing
shelter, such as paying the mortgage of the home, or has
provided a home at no cost to the Custodial Parent in
which the Child resides, the Court or the jury may
allocate such costs or an amount equivalent to such costs
by Deviation from the Presumptive Amount of Child
Support, taking into consideration the circumstances of
the respective Parents and the best interest of the Child.
(I)
PERMANENCY PLAN OR FOSTER CARE PLAN. In
cases where the Child is in the legal custody of the
Department of Human Services, the child protection or
foster care agency of another state or territory, or any
other child-caring entity, public or private, the Court or
the jury may consider a Deviation from the Presumptive
Amount of Child Support if the Deviation will assist in
accomplishing a permanency plan or foster care plan for
the Child that has a goal of returning the Child to the
Parent or Parents and the Parent's need to establish an
adequate household or to otherwise adequately prepare
herself or himself for the return of the Child clearly
justifies a Deviation for this purpose.
(J)
EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSES. The child support
obligation table includes average child rearing
expenditures for families given the parents' combined
adjusted income and number of children. Extraordinary
expenses are in excess of average amounts estimated in
the child support obligation table and are highly variable
among families. Extraordinary expenses shall be
considered on a case-by-case basis in the calculation of
support and may form the basis for deviation from the
presumptive amount of child support so that the actual
amount of the expense is considered in the calculation of
the final child support order for only those families
actually incurring the expense. Extraordinary expenses
shall be prorated between the parents by assigning or
deducting credit for actual payments for extraordinary
expenses.
(i)
Extraordinary educational expenses. Extraordinaryeducational expenses may be a basis for deviation from
the presumptive amount of child support. Extraordinary
educational expenses include, but are not limited to,
tuition, room and board, lab fees, books, fees, and other
reasonable and necessary expenses associated with
special needs education or private elementary and
secondary schooling that are appropriate to the parent's
financial abilities and to the lifestyle of the child if the
parents and the child were living together.
(I)
In determining the amount of deviation for extraordinary
educational expenses, scholarships, grants, stipends, and
other cost-reducing programs received by or on behalf of
the child shall be considered; and
(II)
If a deviation is allowed for extraordinary educational
expenses, a monthly average of the extraordinary
educational expenses shall be based on evidence of prior
or anticipated expenses and entered on the Child Support
Schedule E Deviations.
(ii)
Special expenses incurred for child rearing. Special
expenses incurred for child rearing, including, but not
limited to, quantifiable expense variations related to the
food, clothing, and hygiene costs of children at different
age levels, may be a basis for a deviation from the
presumptive amount of child support. Such expenses
include, but are not limited to, summer camp; music or
art lessons; travel; school sponsored extracurricular
activities, such as band, clubs, and athletics; and other
activities intended to enhance the athletic, social, or
cultural development of a child but not otherwise
required to be used in calculating the presumptive amount
of child support as are health insurance premiums and
work related child care costs. A portion of the basic child
support obligation is intended to cover average amounts
of special expenses incurred in the rearing of a child. In
order to determine if a deviation for special expenses is
warranted, the court or the jury shall consider the full
amount of the special expenses as described in this
division; and when these special expenses exceed 7
percent of the basic child support obligation, then the
additional amount of special expenses shall be considered
as a deviation to cover the full amount of the special
expenses.
(iii)
Extraordinary medical expenses. In instances of extreme
economic hardship involving extraordinary medical
expenses not covered by insurance, the court or the jury
may consider a deviation from the presumptive amount of
child support for extraordinary medical expenses. Such
expenses may include, but are not limited to,
extraordinary medical expenses of the child or a parent of
the child; provided, however, that any such deviation:
(I)
Shall not act to leave a child unsupported; and
(II)
May be ordered for a specific period of time measured in
months.
When extraordinary medical expenses are claimed, the
court or the jury shall consider the resources available for
meeting such needs, including sources available from
agencies and other adults.
(K)
PARENTING TIME.
(i)
The child support obligation table is based upon
expenditures for a child in intact households. The court
may order or the jury may find by special interrogatory a
deviation from the presumptive amount of child support
when special circumstances make the presumptive
amount of child support excessive or inadequate due to
extended parenting time as set forth in the order of
visitation or when the child resides with both parents
equally.
(ii)
If the court or the jury determines that a parenting time
deviation is applicable, then such deviation shall be
included with all other deviations and be treated as a
deduction.
(iii)
In accordance with subsection (d) of Code Section
19-11-8, if any action or claim for parenting time or a
parenting time deviation is brought under this
subparagraph, it shall be an action or claim solely
between the custodial parent and the noncustodial parent,
and not any third parties, including child support services.
(3)
NONSPECIFIC DEVIATIONS. Deviations from the
presumptive amount of child support may be appropriate
for reasons in addition to those established under this
subsection when the court or the jury finds it is in the best
interest of the child.
(j)
Involuntary loss of income.
(1)
In the event a Parent suffers an involuntary terminationof employment, has an extended involuntary loss of
average weekly hours, is involved in an organized strike,
incurs a loss of health, or similar involuntary adversity
resulting in a loss of income of 25 percent or more, then
the portion of child support attributable to lost income
shall not accrue from the date of the service of the
petition for modification, provided that service is made
on the other Parent. It shall not be considered an
involuntary termination of employment if the Parent has
left the employer without good cause in connection with
the Parent's most recent work.
(2)
In the event a modification action is filed pursuant to this
subsection, the Court shall make every effort to expedite
hearing such action.
(3)
The Court may, at its discretion, phase in the new child
support award over a period of up to one year with the
phasing in being largely evenly distributed with at least
an initial immediate adjustment of not less than 25
percent of the difference and at least one intermediate
adjustment prior to the final adjustment at the end of the
phase-in period.
in the new child support award over a period of up to two
years with the phasing in being largely evenly distributed
with at least an initial immediate adjustment of not less
than 25 percent of the difference and at least one
intermediate adjustment prior to the final adjustment at
the end of the phase-in period.
(k)
Modification.
(1)
Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a
parent shall not have the right to petition for modification
of the child support award regardless of the length of time
since the establishment of the child support award unless
there is a substantial change in either parent's income and
financial status or the needs of the child.
(2)
No petition to modify child support may be filed by
either Parent within a period of two years from the date
of the final order on a previous petition to modify by the
same Parent except where:
(A)
A Noncustodial Parent has failed to exercise the court
ordered visitation;
(B)
A Noncustodial Parent has exercised a greater amount of
visitation than was provided in the court order; or
(C)
The motion to modify is based upon an involuntary loss
of income as set forth in subsection (j) of this Code
section.
(3)
(A)
If there is a difference of at least 15 percent but less than
30 percent between a new award and a Georgia child
support order entered prior to January 1, 2007, the Court
may, at its discretion, phase in the new child support
award over a period of up to one year with the phasing in
being largely evenly distributed with at least an initial
immediate adjustment of not less than 25 percent of the
difference and at least one intermediate adjustment prior
to the final adjustment at the end of the phase-in period.
(B)
If there is a difference of 30 percent or more between a
new award and a Georgia child support order entered
prior to January 1, 2007, the Court may, at its discretion,
phase in the new child support award over a period of up
to two years with the phasing in being largely evenly
distributed with at least an initial immediate adjustment
of not less than 25 percent of the difference and at least
one intermediate adjustment prior to the final adjustment
at the end of the phase-in period.
(C)
All child support service's case reviews and
modifications shall proceed and be governed by Code
Section 19-11-12. Subsequent changes to the child
support obligation table shall be a reason to request a
review for modification from child support services to the
extent that such changes are consistent with the
requirements of Code Section 19-11-12."
(4)
A petition for modification shall be filed under the same
rules of procedure applicable to divorce proceedings. The
court may allow, upon motion, the temporary
modification of a child support order pending the final
trial on the petition. An order granting temporary
modification shall be subject to revision by the court at
any time before the final trial. A jury may be demanded
on a petition for modification but the jury shall only be
responsible for determining a parent's gross income and
any deviations. In the hearing upon a petition for
modification, testimony may be given and evidence
introduced relative to the change of circumstances,
income and financial status of either parent, or in the
needs of the child. After hearing both parties and theevidence, the court may modify and revise the previous
judgment, in accordance with the changed circumstances,
income and financial status of either parent, or in the
needs of the child, if such change or changes are
satisfactorily proven so as to warrant the modification
and revision and such modification and revisions are in
the child's best interest. The court shall enter a written
order specifying the basis for the modification, if any,
and shall include all of the information set forth in
paragraph (2) of subsection (c) of this Code section.
(5)
In proceedings for the modification of a child support
award pursuant to the provisions of this Code section, the
Court may award attorney's fees, costs, and expenses of
litigation to the prevailing party as the interests of justice
may require. Where a Custodial Parent prevails in an
upward modification of child support based upon the
Noncustodial Parent's failure to be available and willing
to exercise court ordered visitation, reasonable and
necessary attorney's fees and expenses of litigation shall
be awarded to the Custodial Parent.
(l)
Split Parenting. In cases of Split Parenting, a Worksheet
shall be prepared separately for the Child for whom the
father is the Custodial Parent and for the Child for whom
the mother is the Custodial Parent, and that Worksheet
shall be filed with the clerk of court. For each Split
Parenting custodial situation, the Court shall determine:
(1)
Which Parent is the obligor;
(2)
The Presumptive Amount of Child Support;
(3)
The actual award of child support, if different from the
Presumptive Amount of Child Support;
(4)
How and when the sum certain amount of child support
owed shall be paid; and
(5)
Any other child support responsibilities for each Parent.
(m)
Worksheets.
(1)
Schedules and worksheets shall be prepared by the
parties for purposes of calculating the amount of child
support. In child support services cases in which neither
parent prepared a worksheet, the court may rely on the
worksheet prepared by child support services as a basis
for its order. Information from the schedules shall be
entered on the child support worksheet. The child support
worksheet and, if there are any deviations, Schedule E
shall be attached to the final court order or judgment;
provided, however, that any order entered pursuant to
Code Section 19-13-4 shall not be required to have such
worksheet and schedule attached thereto.
(2)
The child support worksheet and schedules shall be
promulgated by the Georgia Child Support Commission.
(n)
Child Support Obligation Table. The Child Support
Obligation Table shall be proposed by the Georgia Child
Support Commission and shall be as codified in
subsection (o) of this Code section.
(o)
Georgia Schedule of Basic Child Support Obligations.
Combined One Two Three Four Five Six Adjusted Child
Children Children Children Children Children $ 800.00 $
197.00 $ 283.00 $ 330.00 $ 367.00 $ 404.00 $ 440.00
850.00 208.00 298.00 347.00 387.00 425.00 463.00
900.00 218.00 313.00 364.00 406.00 447.00 486.00
950.00 229.00 328.00 381.00 425.00 468.00 509.00
1,000.00 239.00 343.00 398.00 444.00 489.00 532.00
1,050.00 250.00 357.00 415.00 463.00 510.00 554.00
1,100.00 260.00 372.00 432.00 482.00 530.00 577.00
1,150.00 270.00 387.00 449.00 501.00 551.00 600.00
1,200.00 280.00 401.00 466.00 520.00 572.00 622.00
1,250.00 291.00 416.00 483.00 539.00 593.00 645.00
1,300.00 301.00 431.00 500.00 558.00 614.00 668.00
1,350.00 311.00 445.00 517.00 577.00 634.00 690.00
1,400.00 321.00 459.00 533.00 594.00 654.00 711.00
1,450.00 331.00 473.00 549.00 612.00 673.00 733.00
1,500.00 340.00 487.00 565.00 630.00 693.00 754.00
1,550.00 350.00 500.00 581.00 647.00 712.00 775.00
1,600.00 360.00 514.00 597.00 665.00 732.00 796.00
1,650.00 369.00 528.00 612.00 683.00 751.00 817.00
1,700.00 379.00 542.00 628.00 701.00 771.00 838.00
1,750.00 389.00 555.00 644.00 718.00 790.00 860.00
1,800.00 398.00 569.00 660.00 736.00 809.00 881.00
1,850.00 408.00 583.00 676.00 754.00 829.00 902.00
1,900.00 418.00 596.00 692.00 771.00 848.00 923.00
1,950.00 427.00 610.00 708.00 789.00 868.00 944.00
2,000.00 437.00 624.00 723.00 807.00 887.00 965.00
2,050.00 446.00 637.00 739.00 824.00 906.00 986.00
2,100.00 455.00 650.00 754.00 840.00 924.00 1,006.00
2,150.00 465.00 663.00 769.00 857.00 943.00 1,026.00
2,200.00 474.00 676.00 783.00 873.00 961.00 1,045.00
2,250.00 483.00 688.00 798.00 890.00 979.00 1,065.00
2,300.00 492.00 701.00 813.00 907.00 997.00 1,085.002,350.00 501.00 714.00 828.00 923.00 1,016.00 1,105.00
2,400.00 510.00 727.00 843.00 940.00 1,034.00 1,125.00
2,450.00 519.00 740.00 858.00 956.00 1,052.00 1,145.00
2,500.00 528.00 752.00 873.00 973.00 1,070.00 1,165.00
2,550.00 537.00 765.00 888.00 990.00 1,089.00 1,184.00
2,600.00 547.00 778.00 902.00 1,006.00 1,107.00
1,204.00 2,650.00 556.00 791.00 917.00 1,023.00
1,125.00 1,224.00 2,700.00 565.00 804.00 932.00
1,039.00 1,143.00 1,244.00 2,750.00 574.00 816.00
947.00 1,056.00 1,162.00 1,264.00 2,800.00 583.00
829.00 962.00 1,073.00 1,180.00 1,284.00 2,850.00
592.00 842.00 977.00 1,089.00 1,198.00 1,303.00
2,900.00 601.00 855.00 992.00 1,106.00 1,216.00
1,323.00 2,950.00 611.00 868.00 1,006.00 1,122.00
1,234.00 1,343.00 3,000.00 620.00 881.00 1,021.00
1,139.00 1,253.00 1,363.00 3,050.00 629.00 893.00
1,036.00 1,155.00 1,271.00 1,383.00 3,100.00 638.00
906.00 1,051.00 1,172.00 1,289.00 1,402.00 3,150.00
647.00 919.00 1,066.00 1,188.00 1,307.00 1,422.00
3,200.00 655.00 930.00 1,079.00 1,203.00 1,323.00
1,440.00 3,250.00 663.00 941.00 1,092.00 1,217.00
1,339.00 1,457.00 3,300.00 671.00 952.00 1,104.00
1,231.00 1,355.00 1,474.00 3,350.00 679.00 963.00
1,117.00 1,246.00 1,370.00 1,491.00 3,400.00 687.00
974.00 1,130.00 1,260.00 1,386.00 1,508.00 3,450.00
694.00 985.00 1,143.00 1,274.00 1,402.00 1,525.00
3,500.00 702.00 996.00 1,155.00 1,288.00 1,417.00
1,542.00 3,550.00 710.00 1,008.00 1,168.00 1,303.00
1,433.00 1,559.00 3,600.00 718.00 1,019.00 1,181.00
1,317.00 1,448.00 1,576.00 3,650.00 726.00 1,030.00
1,194.00 1,331.00 1,464.00 1,593.00 3,700.00 734.00
1,041.00 1,207.00 1,345.00 1,480.00 1,610.00 3,750.00
741.00 1,051.00 1,219.00 1,359.00 1,495.00 1,627.00
3,800.00 749.00 1,062.00 1,231.00 1,373.00 1,510.00
1,643.00 3,850.00 756.00 1,072.00 1,243.00 1,386.00
1,525.00 1,659.00 3,900.00 764.00 1,083.00 1,255.00
1,400.00 1,540.00 1,675.00 3,950.00 771.00 1,093.00
1,267.00 1,413.00 1,555.00 1,691.00 4,000.00 779.00
1,104.00 1,280.00 1,427.00 1,569.00 1,707.00 4,050.00
786.00 1,114.00 1,292.00 1,440.00 1,584.00 1,724.00
4,100.00 794.00 1,125.00 1,304.00 1,454.00 1,599.00
1,740.00 4,150.00 801.00 1,135.00 1,316.00 1,467.00
1,614.00 1,756.00 4,200.00 809.00 1,146.00 1,328.00
1,481.00 1,629.00 1,772.00 4,250.00 816.00 1,156.00
1,340.00 1,494.00 1,643.00 1,788.00 4,300.00 824.00
1,167.00 1,352.00 1,508.00 1,658.00 1,804.00 4,350.00
831.00 1,177.00 1,364.00 1,521.00 1,673.00 1,820.00
4,400.00 839.00 1,188.00 1,376.00 1,534.00 1,688.00
1,836.00 4,450.00 846.00 1,198.00 1,388.00 1,548.00
1,703.00 1,853.00 4,500.00 853.00 1,209.00 1,400.00
1,561.00 1,718.00 1,869.00 4,550.00 861.00 1,219.00
1,412.00 1,575.00 1,732.00 1,885.00 4,600.00 868.00
1,230.00 1,425.00 1,588.00 1,747.00 1,901.00 4,650.00
876.00 1,240.00 1,437.00 1,602.00 1,762.00 1,917.00
4,700.00 883.00 1,251.00 1,449.00 1,615.00 1,777.00
1,933.00 4,750.00 891.00 1,261.00 1,461.00 1,629.00
1,792.00 1,949.00 4,800.00 898.00 1,271.00 1,473.00
1,642.00 1,807.00 1,966.00 4,850.00 906.00 1,282.00
1,485.00 1,656.00 1,821.00 1,982.00 4,900.00 911.00
1,289.00 1,493.00 1,664.00 1,831.00 1,992.00 4,950.00
914.00 1,293.00 1,496.00 1,668.00 1,835.00 1,997.00
5,000.00 917.00 1,297.00 1,500.00 1,672.00 1,839.00
2,001.00 5,050.00 921.00 1,300.00 1,503.00 1,676.00
1,844.00 2,006.00 5,100.00 924.00 1,304.00 1,507.00
1,680.00 1,848.00 2,011.00 5,150.00 927.00 1,308.00
1,510.00 1,684.00 1,852.00 2,015.00 5,200.00 930.00
1,312.00 1,514.00 1,688.00 1,857.00 2,020.00 5,250.00
934.00 1,316.00 1,517.00 1,692.00 1,861.00 2,025.00
5,300.00 937.00 1,320.00 1,521.00 1,696.00 1,865.00
2,029.00 5,350.00 940.00 1,323.00 1,524.00 1,700.00
1,870.00 2,034.00 5,400.00 943.00 1,327.00 1,528.00
1,704.00 1,874.00 2,039.00 5,450.00 947.00 1,331.00
1,531.00 1,708.00 1,878.00 2,044.00 5,500.00 950.00
1,335.00 1,535.00 1,711.00 1,883.00 2,048.00 5,550.00
953.00 1,339.00 1,538.00 1,715.00 1,887.00 2,053.00
5,600.00 956.00 1,342.00 1,542.00 1,719.00 1,891.00
2,058.00 5,650.00 960.00 1,347.00 1,546.00 1,724.00
1,896.00 2,063.00 5,700.00 964.00 1,352.00 1,552.00
1,731.00 1,904.00 2,071.00 5,750.00 968.00 1,357.00
1,558.00 1,737.00 1,911.00 2,079.00 5,800.00 971.00
1,363.00 1,564.00 1,744.00 1,918.00 2,087.00 5,850.00
975.00 1,368.00 1,570.00 1,750.00 1,925.00 2,094.00
5,900.00 979.00 1,373.00 1,575.00 1,757.00 1,932.00
2,102.00 5,950.00 983.00 1,379.00 1,581.00 1,763.00
1,939.00 2,110.00 6,000.00 987.00 1,384.00 1,587.00
1,770.00 1,947.00 2,118.00 6,050.00 991.00 1,389.00
1,593.00 1,776.00 1,954.00 2,126.00 6,100.00 995.00
1,394.00 1,599.00 1,783.00 1,961.00 2,133.00 6,150.00
999.00 1,400.00 1,605.00 1,789.00 1,968.00 2,141.00
6,200.00 1,003.00 1,405.00 1,610.00 1,796.00 1,975.00
2,149.00 6,250.00 1,007.00 1,410.00 1,616.00 1,802.00
1,982.00 2,157.00 6,300.00 1,011.00 1,416.00 1,622.00
1,809.00 1,989.00 2,164.00 6,350.00 1,015.00 1,421.00
1,628.00 1,815.00 1,996.00 2,172.00 6,400.00 1,018.00
1,426.00 1,633.00 1,821.00 2,003.00 2,180.00 6,450.00
1,023.00 1,432.00 1,639.00 1,828.00 2,011.00 2,188.00
6,500.00 1,027.00 1,437.00 1,646.00 1,835.00 2,018.00
2,196.00 6,550.00 1,031.00 1,442.00 1,652.00 1,841.00
2,026.00 2,204.00 6,600.00 1,035.00 1,448.00 1,658.00
1,848.00 2,033.00 2,212.00 6,650.00 1,039.00 1,453.00
1,664.00 1,855.00 2,040.00 2,220.00 6,700.00 1,043.00
1,459.00 1,670.00 1,862.00 2,048.00 2,228.00 6,750.00
1,047.00 1,464.00 1,676.00 1,869.00 2,055.00 2,236.00
6,800.00 1,051.00 1,470.00 1,682.00 1,875.00 2,063.00
2,244.00 6,850.00 1,055.00 1,475.00 1,688.00 1,882.00
2,070.00 2,252.00 6,900.00 1,059.00 1,480.00 1,694.00
1,889.00 2,078.00 2,260.00 6,950.00 1,063.00 1,486.00
1,700.00 1,896.00 2,085.00 2,269.00 7,000.00 1,067.00
1,491.00 1,706.00 1,902.00 2,092.00 2,277.00 7,050.00
1,071.00 1,497.00 1,712.00 1,909.00 2,100.00 2,285.00
7,100.00 1,075.00 1,502.00 1,718.00 1,916.00 2,107.00
2,293.00 7,150.00 1,079.00 1,508.00 1,724.00 1,923.00
2,115.00 2,301.00 7,200.00 1,083.00 1,513.00 1,730.00
1,929.00 2,122.00 2,309.00 7,250.00 1,087.00 1,518.00
1,736.00 1,936.00 2,130.00 2,317.00 7,300.00 1,092.00
1,524.00 1,742.00 1,943.00 2,137.00 2,325.00 7,350.00
1,096.00 1,529.00 1,748.00 1,950.00 2,144.00 2,333.00
7,400.00 1,100.00 1,535.00 1,755.00 1,956.00 2,152.00
2,341.00 7,450.00 1,104.00 1,540.00 1,761.00 1,963.00
2,159.00 2,349.00 7,500.00 1,108.00 1,546.00 1,767.001,970.00 2,167.00 2,357.00 7,550.00 1,112.00 1,552.00
1,773.00 1,977.00 2,175.00 2,366.00 7,600.00 1,116.00
1,556.00 1,778.00 1,983.00 2,181.00 2,373.00 7,650.00
1,117.00 1,557.00 1,779.00 1,984.00 2,182.00 2,375.00
7,700.00 1,118.00 1,559.00 1,781.00 1,986.00 2,184.00
2,376.00 7,750.00 1,119.00 1,560.00 1,782.00 1,987.00
2,186.00 2,378.00 7,800.00 1,120.00 1,562.00 1,784.00
1,989.00 2,188.00 2,380.00 7,850.00 1,122.00 1,563.00
1,785.00 1,990.00 2,189.00 2,382.00 7,900.00 1,123.00
1,565.00 1,786.00 1,992.00 2,191.00 2,384.00 7,950.00
1,124.00 1,566.00 1,788.00 1,993.00 2,193.00 2,386.00
8,000.00 1,125.00 1,567.00 1,789.00 1,995.00 2,194.00
2,387.00 8,050.00 1,127.00 1,569.00 1,790.00 1,996.00
2,196.00 2,389.00 8,100.00 1,128.00 1,570.00 1,792.00
1,998.00 2,198.00 2,391.00 8,150.00 1,129.00 1,572.00
1,793.00 1,999.00 2,199.00 2,393.00 8,200.00 1,130.00
1,573.00 1,795.00 2,001.00 2,201.00 2,395.00 8,250.00
1,131.00 1,575.00 1,796.00 2,003.00 2,203.00 2,397.00
8,300.00 1,133.00 1,576.00 1,797.00 2,004.00 2,204.00
2,398.00 8,350.00 1,134.00 1,578.00 1,799.00 2,006.00
2,206.00 2,400.00 8,400.00 1,135.00 1,579.00 1,800.00
2,007.00 2,208.00 2,402.00 8,450.00 1,136.00 1,580.00
1,802.00 2,009.00 2,210.00 2,404.00 8,500.00 1,138.00
1,582.00 1,803.00 2,010.00 2,211.00 2,406.00 8,550.00
1,139.00 1,583.00 1,804.00 2,012.00 2,213.00 2,408.00
8,600.00 1,140.00 1,585.00 1,806.00 2,013.00 2,215.00
2,410.00 8,650.00 1,141.00 1,586.00 1,807.00 2,015.00
2,216.00 2,411.00 8,700.00 1,142.00 1,588.00 1,808.00
2,016.00 2,218.00 2,413.00 8,750.00 1,144.00 1,589.00
1,810.00 2,018.00 2,220.00 2,415.00 8,800.00 1,145.00
1,591.00 1,811.00 2,019.00 2,221.00 2,417.00 8,850.00
1,146.00 1,592.00 1,813.00 2,021.00 2,223.00 2,419.00
8,900.00 1,147.00 1,593.00 1,814.00 2,023.00 2,225.00
2,421.00 8,950.00 1,149.00 1,595.00 1,815.00 2,024.00
2,226.00 2,422.00 9,000.00 1,150.00 1,596.00 1,817.00
2,026.00 2,228.00 2,424.00 9,050.00 1,153.00 1,601.00
1,822.00 2,032.00 2,235.00 2,431.00 9,100.00 1,159.00
1,609.00 1,831.00 2,042.00 2,246.00 2,443.00 9,150.00
1,164.00 1,617.00 1,840.00 2,052.00 2,257.00 2,455.00
9,200.00 1,170.00 1,624.00 1,849.00 2,062.00 2,268.00
2,467.00 9,250.00 1,175.00 1,632.00 1,858.00 2,071.00
2,279.00 2,479.00 9,300.00 1,181.00 1,640.00 1,867.00
2,081.00 2,290.00 2,491.00 9,350.00 1,187.00 1,648.00
1,876.00 2,091.00 2,301.00 2,503.00 9,400.00 1,192.00
1,656.00 1,885.00 2,101.00 2,311.00 2,515.00 9,450.00
1,198.00 1,663.00 1,894.00 2,111.00 2,322.00 2,527.00
9,500.00 1,203.00 1,671.00 1,902.00 2,121.00 2,333.00
2,539.00 9,550.00 1,209.00 1,679.00 1,911.00 2,131.00
2,344.00 2,551.00 9,600.00 1,214.00 1,687.00 1,920.00
2,141.00 2,355.00 2,563.00 9,650.00 1,220.00 1,694.00
1,929.00 2,151.00 2,366.00 2,574.00 9,700.00 1,226.00
1,702.00 1,938.00 2,161.00 2,377.00 2,586.00 9,750.00
1,231.00 1,710.00 1,947.00 2,171.00 2,388.00 2,598.00
9,800.00 1,237.00 1,718.00 1,956.00 2,181.00 2,399.00
2,610.00 9,850.00 1,242.00 1,725.00 1,965.00 2,191.00
2,410.00 2,622.00 9,900.00 1,248.00 1,733.00 1,974.00
2,201.00 2,421.00 2,634.00 9,950.00 1,253.00 1,741.00
1,983.00 2,211.00 2,432.00 2,646.00 10,000.00 1,259.00
1,749.00 1,992.00 2,221.00 2,443.00 2,658.00 10,050.00
1,264.00 1,757.00 2,001.00 2,231.00 2,454.00 2,670.00
10,100.00 1,270.00 1,764.00 2,010.00 2,241.00 2,465.00
2,682.00 10,150.00 1,276.00 1,772.00 2,019.00 2,251.00
2,476.00 2,694.00 10,200.00 1,281.00 1,780.00 2,028.00
2,261.00 2,487.00 2,706.00 10,250.00 1,287.00 1,788.00
2,036.00 2,271.00 2,498.00 2,718.00 10,300.00 1,292.00
1,795.00 2,045.00 2,281.00 2,509.00 2,729.00 10,350.00
1,298.00 1,803.00 2,054.00 2,291.00 2,520.00 2,741.00
10,400.00 1,303.00 1,811.00 2,063.00 2,301.00 2,531.00
2,753.00 10,450.00 1,309.00 1,819.00 2,072.00 2,311.00
2,542.00 2,765.00 10,500.00 1,313.00 1,825.00 2,079.00
2,318.00 2,550.00 2,774.00 10,550.00 1,317.00 1,830.00
2,085.00 2,325.00 2,557.00 2,782.00 10,600.00 1,321.00
1,835.00 2,091.00 2,331.00 2,564.00 2,790.00 10,650.00
1,325.00 1,841.00 2,096.00 2,338.00 2,571.00 2,798.00
10,700.00 1,329.00 1,846.00 2,102.00 2,344.00 2,578.00
2,805.00 10,750.00 1,332.00 1,851.00 2,108.00 2,351.00
2,586.00 2,813.00 10,800.00 1,336.00 1,856.00 2,114.00
2,357.00 2,593.00 2,821.00 10,850.00 1,340.00 1,862.00
2,120.00 2,364.00 2,600.00 2,829.00 10,900.00 1,344.00
1,867.00 2,126.00 2,370.00 2,607.00 2,836.00 10,950.00
1,348.00 1,872.00 2,131.00 2,377.00 2,614.00 2,844.00
11,000.00 1,351.00 1,877.00 2,137.00 2,383.00 2,621.00
2,852.00 11,050.00 1,355.00 1,883.00 2,143.00 2,390.00
2,628.00 2,860.00 11,100.00 1,359.00 1,888.00 2,149.00
2,396.00 2,636.00 2,868.00 11,150.00 1,363.00 1,893.00
2,155.00 2,403.00 2,643.00 2,875.00 11,200.00 1,367.00
1,898.00 2,161.00 2,409.00 2,650.00 2,883.00 11,250.00
1,371.00 1,904.00 2,166.00 2,415.00 2,657.00 2,891.00
11,300.00 1,374.00 1,909.00 2,172.00 2,422.00 2,664.00
2,899.00 11,350.00 1,378.00 1,914.00 2,178.00 2,428.00
2,671.00 2,906.00 11,400.00 1,382.00 1,919.00 2,184.00
2,435.00 2,678.00 2,914.00 11,450.00 1,386.00 1,925.00
2,190.00 2,441.00 2,686.00 2,922.00 11,500.00 1,390.00
1,930.00 2,195.00 2,448.00 2,693.00 2,930.00 11,550.00
1,394.00 1,935.00 2,201.00 2,454.00 2,700.00 2,938.00
11,600.00 1,397.00 1,940.00 2,207.00 2,461.00 2,707.00
2,945.00 11,650.00 1,401.00 1,946.00 2,213.00 2,467.00
2,714.00 2,953.00 11,700.00 1,405.00 1,951.00 2,219.00
2,474.00 2,721.00 2,961.00 11,750.00 1,409.00 1,956.00
2,225.00 2,480.00 2,728.00 2,969.00 11,800.00 1,413.00
1,961.00 2,230.00 2,487.00 2,736.00 2,976.00 11,850.00
1,417.00 1,967.00 2,236.00 2,493.00 2,743.00 2,984.00
11,900.00 1,420.00 1,972.00 2,242.00 2,500.00 2,750.00
2,992.00 11,950.00 1,424.00 1,977.00 2,248.00 2,506.00
2,757.00 3,000.00 12,000.00 1,428.00 1,982.00 2,254.00
2,513.00 2,764.00 3,007.00 12,050.00 1,432.00 1,988.00
2,260.00 2,519.00 2,771.00 3,015.00 12,100.00 1,436.00
1,993.00 2,265.00 2,526.00 2,779.00 3,023.00 12,150.00
1,439.00 1,998.00 2,271.00 2,532.00 2,786.00 3,031.00
12,200.00 1,443.00 2,003.00 2,277.00 2,539.00 2,793.00
3,039.00 12,250.00 1,447.00 2,009.00 2,283.00 2,545.00
2,800.00 3,046.00 12,300.00 1,451.00 2,014.00 2,289.00
2,552.00 2,807.00 3,054.00 12,350.00 1,455.00 2,019.00
2,295.00 2,558.00 2,814.00 3,062.00 12,400.00 1,459.00
2,024.00 2,300.00 2,565.00 2,821.00 3,070.00 12,450.00
1,462.00 2,030.00 2,306.00 2,571.00 2,829.00 3,077.00
12,500.00 1,466.00 2,035.00 2,312.00 2,578.00 2,836.00
3,085.00 12,550.00 1,470.00 2,040.00 2,318.00 2,584.00
2,843.00 3,093.00 12,600.00 1,474.00 2,045.00 2,324.00
2,591.00 2,850.00 3,101.00 12,650.00 1,477.00 2,050.002,329.00 2,597.00 2,857.00 3,108.00 12,700.00 1,481.00
2,055.00 2,335.00 2,603.00 2,863.00 3,115.00 12,750.00
1,484.00 2,060.00 2,340.00 2,609.00 2,870.00 3,123.00
12,800.00 1,487.00 2,064.00 2,345.00 2,615.00 2,877.00
3,130.00 12,850.00 1,491.00 2,069.00 2,351.00 2,621.00
2,883.00 3,137.00 12,900.00 1,494.00 2,074.00 2,356.00
2,627.00 2,890.00 3,144.00 12,950.00 1,497.00 2,078.00
2,361.00 2,633.00 2,896.00 3,151.00 13,000.00 1,501.00
2,083.00 2,367.00 2,639.00 2,903.00 3,158.00 13,050.00
1,504.00 2,087.00 2,372.00 2,645.00 2,909.00 3,165.00
13,100.00 1,507.00 2,092.00 2,377.00 2,651.00 2,916.00
3,172.00 13,150.00 1,510.00 2,097.00 2,383.00 2,657.00
2,922.00 3,180.00 13,200.00 1,514.00 2,101.00 2,388.00
2,663.00 2,929.00 3,187.00 13,250.00 1,517.00 2,106.00
2,393.00 2,668.00 2,935.00 3,193.00 13,300.00 1,520.00
2,110.00 2,398.00 2,674.00 2,941.00 3,200.00 13,350.00
1,523.00 2,114.00 2,403.00 2,679.00 2,947.00 3,206.00
13,400.00 1,526.00 2,118.00 2,408.00 2,685.00 2,953.00
3,213.00 13,450.00 1,529.00 2,123.00 2,413.00 2,690.00
2,959.00 3,220.00 13,500.00 1,532.00 2,127.00 2,418.00
2,696.00 2,965.00 3,226.00 13,550.00 1,535.00 2,131.00
2,423.00 2,701.00 2,971.00 3,233.00 13,600.00 1,538.00
2,136.00 2,428.00 2,707.00 2,977.00 3,239.00 13,650.00
1,541.00 2,140.00 2,432.00 2,712.00 2,983.00 3,246.00
13,700.00 1,544.00 2,144.00 2,437.00 2,718.00 2,989.00
3,253.00 13,750.00 1,547.00 2,148.00 2,442.00 2,723.00
2,996.00 3,259.00 13,800.00 1,550.00 2,153.00 2,447.00
2,729.00 3,002.00 3,266.00 13,850.00 1,553.00 2,157.00
2,452.00 2,734.00 3,008.00 3,272.00 13,900.00 1,556.00
2,161.00 2,457.00 2,740.00 3,014.00 3,279.00 13,950.00
1,559.00 2,166.00 2,462.00 2,745.00 3,020.00 3,285.00
14,000.00 1,562.00 2,170.00 2,467.00 2,751.00 3,026.00
3,292.00 14,050.00 1,565.00 2,174.00 2,472.00 2,756.00
3,032.00 3,299.00 14,100.00 1,568.00 2,178.00 2,477.00
2,762.00 3,038.00 3,305.00 14,150.00 1,571.00 2,183.00
2,482.00 2,767.00 3,044.00 3,312.00 14,200.00 1,574.00
2,187.00 2,487.00 2,773.00 3,050.00 3,318.00 14,250.00
1,577.00 2,191.00 2,492.00 2,778.00 3,056.00 3,325.00
14,300.00 1,581.00 2,195.00 2,497.00 2,784.00 3,062.00
3,332.00 14,350.00 1,584.00 2,200.00 2,502.00 2,789.00
3,068.00 3,338.00 14,400.00 1,587.00 2,204.00 2,506.00
2,795.00 3,074.00 3,345.00 14,450.00 1,590.00 2,208.00
2,511.00 2,800.00 3,080.00 3,351.00 14,500.00 1,593.00
2,213.00 2,516.00 2,806.00 3,086.00 3,358.00 14,550.00
1,596.00 2,217.00 2,521.00 2,811.00 3,092.00 3,365.00
14,600.00 1,599.00 2,221.00 2,526.00 2,817.00 3,098.00
3,371.00 14,650.00 1,602.00 2,225.00 2,531.00 2,822.00
3,104.00 3,378.00 14,700.00 1,605.00 2,230.00 2,536.00
2,828.00 3,111.00 3,384.00 14,750.00 1,608.00 2,234.00
2,541.00 2,833.00 3,117.00 3,391.00 14,800.00 1,611.00
2,238.00 2,546.00 2,839.00 3,123.00 3,397.00 14,850.00
1,614.00 2,243.00 2,551.00 2,844.00 3,129.00 3,404.00
14,900.00 1,617.00 2,247.00 2,556.00 2,850.00 3,135.00
3,411.00 14,950.00 1,620.00 2,251.00 2,561.00 2,855.00
3,141.00 3,417.00 15,000.00 1,623.00 2,255.00 2,566.00
2,861.00 3,147.00 3,424.00 15,050.00 1,626.00 2,260.00
2,571.00 2,866.00 3,153.00 3,430.00 15,100.00 1,629.00
2,264.00 2,576.00 2,872.00 3,159.00 3,437.00 15,150.00
1,632.00 2,268.00 2,581.00 2,877.00 3,165.00 3,444.00
15,200.00 1,635.00 2,272.00 2,585.00 2,883.00 3,171.00
3,450.00 15,250.00 1,638.00 2,277.00 2,590.00 2,888.00
3,177.00 3,457.00 15,300.00 1,641.00 2,281.00 2,595.00
2,894.00 3,183.00 3,463.00 15,350.00 1,644.00 2,285.00
2,600.00 2,899.00 3,189.00 3,470.00 15,400.00 1,647.00
2,290.00 2,605.00 2,905.00 3,195.00 3,476.00 15,450.00
1,650.00 2,294.00 2,610.00 2,910.00 3,201.00 3,483.00
15,500.00 1,653.00 2,298.00 2,615.00 2,916.00 3,207.00
3,490.00 15,550.00 1,656.00 2,302.00 2,620.00 2,921.00
3,213.00 3,496.00 15,600.00 1,659.00 2,307.00 2,625.00
2,927.00 3,219.00 3,503.00 15,650.00 1,663.00 2,311.00
2,630.00 2,932.00 3,226.00 3,509.00 15,700.00 1,666.00
2,315.00 2,635.00 2,938.00 3,232.00 3,516.00 15,750.00
1,669.00 2,320.00 2,640.00 2,943.00 3,238.00 3,523.00
15,800.00 1,672.00 2,324.00 2,645.00 2,949.00 3,244.00
3,529.00 15,850.00 1,675.00 2,328.00 2,650.00 2,954.00
3,250.00 3,536.00 15,900.00 1,678.00 2,332.00 2,655.00
2,960.00 3,256.00 3,542.00 15,950.00 1,681.00 2,337.00
2,659.00 2,965.00 3,262.00 3,549.00 16,000.00 1,684.00
2,341.00 2,664.00 2,971.00 3,268.00 3,555.00 16,050.00
1,687.00 2,345.00 2,669.00 2,976.00 3,274.00 3,562.00
16,100.00 1,690.00 2,349.00 2,674.00 2,982.00 3,280.00
3,569.00 16,150.00 1,692.00 2,353.00 2,678.00 2,986.00
3,285.00 3,574.00 16,200.00 1,695.00 2,356.00 2,682.00
2,990.00 3,289.00 3,579.00 16,250.00 1,698.00 2,360.00
2,686.00 2,994.00 3,294.00 3,584.00 16,300.00 1,700.00
2,363.00 2,689.00 2,999.00 3,299.00 3,589.00 16,350.00
1,703.00 2,367.00 2,693.00 3,003.00 3,303.00 3,594.00
16,400.00 1,706.00 2,370.00 2,697.00 3,007.00 3,308.00
3,599.00 16,450.00 1,708.00 2,374.00 2,701.00 3,011.00
3,313.00 3,604.00 16,500.00 1,711.00 2,377.00 2,705.00
3,016.00 3,317.00 3,609.00 16,550.00 1,714.00 2,381.00
2,708.00 3,020.00 3,322.00 3,614.00 16,600.00 1,716.00
2,384.00 2,712.00 3,024.00 3,327.00 3,619.00 16,650.00
1,719.00 2,388.00 2,716.00 3,028.00 3,331.00 3,624.00
16,700.00 1,722.00 2,391.00 2,720.00 3,033.00 3,336.00
3,630.00 16,750.00 1,724.00 2,395.00 2,724.00 3,037.00
3,341.00 3,635.00 16,800.00 1,727.00 2,398.00 2,728.00
3,041.00 3,345.00 3,640.00 16,850.00 1,730.00 2,402.00
2,731.00 3,045.00 3,350.00 3,645.00 16,900.00 1,732.00
2,405.00 2,735.00 3,050.00 3,355.00 3,650.00 16,950.00
1,735.00 2,409.00 2,739.00 3,054.00 3,359.00 3,655.00
17,000.00 1,737.00 2,412.00 2,743.00 3,058.00 3,364.00
3,660.00 17,050.00 1,740.00 2,416.00 2,747.00 3,062.00
3,369.00 3,665.00 17,100.00 1,743.00 2,419.00 2,750.00
3,067.00 3,373.00 3,670.00 17,150.00 1,745.00 2,423.00
2,754.00 3,071.00 3,378.00 3,675.00 17,200.00 1,748.00
2,426.00 2,758.00 3,075.00 3,383.00 3,680.00 17,250.00
1,751.00 2,430.00 2,762.00 3,079.00 3,387.00 3,685.00
17,300.00 1,753.00 2,433.00 2,766.00 3,084.00 3,392.00
3,691.00 17,350.00 1,756.00 2,437.00 2,769.00 3,088.00
3,397.00 3,696.00 17,400.00 1,759.00 2,440.00 2,773.00
3,092.00 3,401.00 3,701.00 17,450.00 1,761.00 2,444.00
2,777.00 3,096.00 3,406.00 3,706.00 17,500.00 1,764.00
2,447.00 2,781.00 3,101.00 3,411.00 3,711.00 17,550.00
1,767.00 2,451.00 2,785.00 3,105.00 3,415.00 3,716.00
17,600.00 1,769.00 2,454.00 2,788.00 3,109.00 3,420.00
3,721.00 17,650.00 1,772.00 2,458.00 2,792.00 3,113.00
3,425.00 3,726.00 17,700.00 1,774.00 2,461.00 2,796.00
3,118.00 3,429.00 3,731.00 17,750.00 1,777.00 2,465.00
2,800.00 3,122.00 3,434.00 3,736.00 17,800.00 1,780.002,468.00 2,804.00 3,126.00 3,439.00 3,741.00 17,850.00
1,782.00 2,472.00 2,808.00 3,130.00 3,443.00 3,746.00
17,900.00 1,785.00 2,475.00 2,811.00 3,135.00 3,448.00
3,752.00 17,950.00 1,788.00 2,478.00 2,815.00 3,139.00
3,453.00 3,757.00 18,000.00 1,790.00 2,482.00 2,819.00
3,143.00 3,457.00 3,762.00 18,050.00 1,793.00 2,485.00
2,823.00 3,147.00 3,462.00 3,767.00 18,100.00 1,796.00
2,489.00 2,827.00 3,152.00 3,467.00 3,772.00 18,150.00
1,798.00 2,492.00 2,830.00 3,156.00 3,471.00 3,777.00
18,200.00 1,801.00 2,496.00 2,834.00 3,160.00 3,476.00
3,782.00 18,250.00 1,804.00 2,499.00 2,838.00 3,164.00
3,481.00 3,787.00 18,300.00 1,806.00 2,503.00 2,842.00
3,169.00 3,485.00 3,792.00 18,350.00 1,809.00 2,506.00
2,846.00 3,173.00 3,490.00 3,797.00 18,400.00 1,812.00
2,510.00 2,849.00 3,177.00 3,495.00 3,802.00 18,450.00
1,814.00 2,513.00 2,853.00 3,181.00 3,499.00 3,807.00
18,500.00 1,817.00 2,517.00 2,857.00 3,186.00 3,504.00
3,813.00 18,550.00 1,819.00 2,520.00 2,861.00 3,190.00
3,509.00 3,818.00 18,600.00 1,822.00 2,524.00 2,865.00
3,194.00 3,513.00 3,823.00 18,650.00 1,825.00 2,527.00
2,868.00 3,198.00 3,518.00 3,828.00 18,700.00 1,827.00
2,531.00 2,872.00 3,203.00 3,523.00 3,833.00 18,750.00
1,830.00 2,534.00 2,876.00 3,207.00 3,528.00 3,838.00
18,800.00 1,833.00 2,538.00 2,880.00 3,211.00 3,532.00
3,843.00 18,850.00 1,835.00 2,541.00 2,884.00 3,215.00
3,537.00 3,848.00 18,900.00 1,838.00 2,545.00 2,888.00
3,220.00 3,542.00 3,853.00 18,950.00 1,841.00 2,548.00
2,891.00 3,224.00 3,546.00 3,858.00 19,000.00 1,843.00
2,552.00 2,895.00 3,228.00 3,551.00 3,863.00 19,050.00
1,846.00 2,555.00 2,899.00 3,232.00 3,556.00 3,868.00
19,100.00 1,849.00 2,559.00 2,903.00 3,237.00 3,560.00
3,874.00 19,150.00 1,851.00 2,562.00 2,907.00 3,241.00
3,565.00 3,879.00 19,200.00 1,854.00 2,566.00 2,910.00
3,245.00 3,570.00 3,884.00 19,250.00 1,856.00 2,569.00
2,914.00 3,249.00 3,574.00 3,889.00 19,300.00 1,859.00
2,573.00 2,918.00 3,254.00 3,579.00 3,894.00 19,350.00
1,862.00 2,576.00 2,922.00 3,258.00 3,584.00 3,899.00
19,400.00 1,864.00 2,580.00 2,926.00 3,262.00 3,588.00
3,904.00 19,450.00 1,867.00 2,583.00 2,929.00 3,266.00
3,593.00 3,909.00 19,500.00 1,870.00 2,587.00 2,933.00
3,271.00 3,598.00 3,914.00 19,550.00 1,872.00 2,590.00
2,937.00 3,275.00 3,602.00 3,919.00 19,600.00 1,875.00
2,594.00 2,941.00 3,279.00 3,607.00 3,924.00 19,650.00
1,878.00 2,597.00 2,945.00 3,283.00 3,612.00 3,929.00
19,700.00 1,880.00 2,601.00 2,948.00 3,288.00 3,616.00
3,935.00 19,750.00 1,883.00 2,604.00 2,952.00 3,292.00
3,621.00 3,940.00 19,800.00 1,886.00 2,608.00 2,956.00
3,296.00 3,626.00 3,945.00 19,850.00 1,888.00 2,611.00
2,960.00 3,300.00 3,630.00 3,950.00 19,900.00 1,891.00
2,615.00 2,964.00 3,305.00 3,635.00 3,955.00 19,950.00
1,893.00 2,618.00 2,967.00 3,309.00 3,640.00 3,960.00
20,000.00 1,896.00 2,622.00 2,971.00 3,313.00 3,644.00
3,965.00 20,050.00 1,899.00 2,625.00 2,975.00 3,317.00
3,649.00 3,970.00 20,100.00 1,901.00 2,628.00 2,979.00
3,321.00 3,654.00 3,975.00 20,150.00 1,904.00 2,632.00
2,983.00 3,326.00 3,658.00 3,980.00 20,200.00 1,907.00
2,635.00 2,987.00 3,330.00 3,663.00 3,985.00 20,250.00
1,909.00 2,639.00 2,990.00 3,334.00 3,668.00 3,990.00
20,300.00 1,912.00 2,642.00 2,994.00 3,338.00 3,672.00
3,996.00 20,350.00 1,915.00 2,646.00 2,998.00 3,343.00
3,677.00 4,001.00 20,400.00 1,917.00 2,649.00 3,002.00
3,347.00 3,682.00 4,006.00 20,450.00 1,920.00 2,653.00
3,006.00 3,351.00 3,686.00 4,011.00 20,500.00 1,923.00
2,656.00 3,009.00 3,355.00 3,691.00 4,016.00 20,550.00
1,925.00 2,660.00 3,013.00 3,360.00 3,696.00 4,021.00
20,600.00 1,928.00 2,663.00 3,017.00 3,364.00 3,700.00
4,026.00 20,650.00 1,931.00 2,667.00 3,021.00 3,368.00
3,705.00 4,031.00 20,700.00 1,933.00 2,670.00 3,025.00
3,372.00 3,710.00 4,036.00 20,750.00 1,936.00 2,674.00
3,028.00 3,377.00 3,714.00 4,041.00 20,800.00 1,938.00
2,677.00 3,032.00 3,381.00 3,719.00 4,046.00 20,850.00
1,941.00 2,681.00 3,036.00 3,385.00 3,724.00 4,051.00
20,900.00 1,944.00 2,684.00 3,040.00 3,389.00 3,728.00
4,056.00 20,950.00 1,946.00 2,688.00 3,044.00 3,394.00
3,733.00 4,062.00 21,000.00 1,949.00 2,691.00 3,047.00
3,398.00 3,738.00 4,067.00 21,050.00 1,952.00 2,695.00
3,051.00 3,402.00 3,742.00 4,072.00 21,100.00 1,954.00
2,698.00 3,055.00 3,406.00 3,747.00 4,077.00 21,150.00
1,957.00 2,702.00 3,059.00 3,411.00 3,752.00 4,082.00
21,200.00 1,960.00 2,705.00 3,063.00 3,415.00 3,756.00
4,087.00 21,250.00 1,962.00 2,709.00 3,067.00 3,419.00
3,761.00 4,092.00 21,300.00 1,965.00 2,712.00 3,070.00
3,423.00 3,766.00 4,097.00 21,350.00 1,968.00 2,716.00
3,074.00 3,428.00 3,770.00 4,102.00 21,400.00 1,970.00
2,719.00 3,078.00 3,432.00 3,775.00 4,107.00 21,450.00
1,973.00 2,723.00 3,082.00 3,436.00 3,780.00 4,112.00
21,500.00 1,975.00 2,726.00 3,086.00 3,440.00 3,784.00
4,117.00 21,550.00 1,978.00 2,730.00 3,089.00 3,445.00
3,789.00 4,123.00 21,600.00 1,981.00 2,733.00 3,093.00
3,449.00 3,794.00 4,128.00 21,650.00 1,983.00 2,737.00
3,097.00 3,453.00 3,798.00 4,133.00 21,700.00 1,986.00
2,740.00 3,101.00 3,457.00 3,803.00 4,138.00 21,750.00
1,989.00 2,744.00 3,105.00 3,462.00 3,808.00 4,143.00
21,800.00 1,991.00 2,747.00 3,108.00 3,466.00 3,812.00
4,148.00 21,850.00 1,994.00 2,751.00 3,112.00 3,470.00
3,817.00 4,153.00 21,900.00 1,997.00 2,754.00 3,116.00
3,474.00 3,822.00 4,158.00 21,950.00 1,999.00 2,758.00
3,120.00 3,479.00 3,827.00 4,163.00 22,000.00 2,002.00
2,761.00 3,124.00 3,483.00 3,831.00 4,168.00 22,050.00
2,005.00 2,765.00 3,127.00 3,487.00 3,836.00 4,173.00
22,100.00 2,007.00 2,768.00 3,131.00 3,491.00 3,841.00
4,178.00 22,150.00 2,010.00 2,772.00 3,135.00 3,496.00
3,845.00 4,184.00 22,200.00 2,012.00 2,775.00 3,139.00
3,500.00 3,850.00 4,189.00 22,250.00 2,015.00 2,779.00
3,143.00 3,504.00 3,855.00 4,194.00 22,300.00 2,018.00
2,782.00 3,147.00 3,508.00 3,859.00 4,199.00 22,350.00
2,020.00 2,785.00 3,150.00 3,513.00 3,864.00 4,204.00
22,400.00 2,022.00 2,788.00 3,153.00 3,515.00 3,867.00
4,207.00 22,450.00 2,024.00 2,790.00 3,155.00 3,517.00
3,869.00 4,210.00 22,500.00 2,025.00 2,792.00 3,157.00
3,520.00 3,872.00 4,212.00 22,550.00 2,027.00 2,793.00
3,158.00 3,522.00 3,874.00 4,215.00 22,600.00 2,028.00
2,795.00 3,160.00 3,524.00 3,876.00 4,217.00 22,650.00
2,029.00 2,797.00 3,162.00 3,526.00 3,878.00 4,220.00
22,700.00 2,031.00 2,799.00 3,164.00 3,528.00 3,881.00
4,222.00 22,750.00 2,032.00 2,801.00 3,166.00 3,530.00
3,883.00 4,225.00 22,800.00 2,034.00 2,803.00 3,168.00
3,532.00 3,885.00 4,227.00 22,850.00 2,035.00 2,804.00
3,169.00 3,534.00 3,888.00 4,230.00 22,900.00 2,036.00
2,806.00 3,171.00 3,536.00 3,890.00 4,232.00 22,950.002,038.00 2,808.00 3,173.00 3,538.00 3,892.00 4,235.00
23,000.00 2,039.00 2,810.00 3,175.00 3,540.00 3,894.00
4,237.00 23,050.00 2,041.00 2,812.00 3,177.00 3,542.00
3,897.00 4,240.00 23,100.00 2,042.00 2,814.00 3,179.00
3,544.00 3,899.00 4,242.00 23,150.00 2,044.00 2,816.00
3,181.00 3,546.00 3,901.00 4,245.00 23,200.00 2,045.00
2,817.00 3,182.00 3,548.00 3,904.00 4,247.00 23,250.00
2,046.00 2,819.00 3,184.00 3,550.00 3,906.00 4,250.00
23,300.00 2,048.00 2,821.00 3,186.00 3,552.00 3,908.00
4,252.00 23,350.00 2,049.00 2,823.00 3,188.00 3,555.00
3,910.00 4,254.00 23,400.00 2,051.00 2,825.00 3,190.00
3,557.00 3,913.00 4,257.00 23,450.00 2,052.00 2,827.00
3,192.00 3,559.00 3,915.00 4,259.00 23,500.00 2,053.00
2,828.00 3,193.00 3,561.00 3,917.00 4,262.00 23,550.00
2,055.00 2,830.00 3,195.00 3,563.00 3,919.00 4,264.00
23,600.00 2,056.00 2,832.00 3,197.00 3,565.00 3,922.00
4,267.00 23,650.00 2,058.00 2,834.00 3,199.00 3,567.00
3,924.00 4,269.00 23,700.00 2,059.00 2,836.00 3,201.00
3,569.00 3,926.00 4,272.00 23,750.00 2,061.00 2,838.00
3,203.00 3,571.00 3,929.00 4,274.00 23,800.00 2,062.00
2,840.00 3,204.00 3,573.00 3,931.00 4,277.00 23,850.00
2,063.00 2,841.00 3,206.00 3,575.00 3,933.00 4,279.00
23,900.00 2,065.00 2,843.00 3,208.00 3,577.00 3,935.00
4,282.00 23,950.00 2,066.00 2,845.00 3,210.00 3,579.00
3,938.00 4,284.00 24,000.00 2,068.00 2,847.00 3,212.00
3,581.00 3,940.00 4,287.00 24,050.00 2,069.00 2,849.00
3,214.00 3,583.00 3,942.00 4,289.00 24,100.00 2,070.00
2,851.00 3,216.00 3,585.00 3,945.00 4,292.00 24,150.00
2,072.00 2,852.00 3,217.00 3,587.00 3,947.00 4,294.00
24,200.00 2,073.00 2,854.00 3,219.00 3,589.00 3,949.00
4,297.00 24,250.00 2,075.00 2,856.00 3,221.00 3,592.00
3,951.00 4,299.00 24,300.00 2,076.00 2,858.00 3,223.00
3,594.00 3,954.00 4,302.00 24,350.00 2,077.00 2,860.00
3,225.00 3,596.00 3,956.00 4,304.00 24,400.00 2,079.00
2,862.00 3,227.00 3,598.00 3,958.00 4,307.00 24,450.00
2,080.00 2,864.00 3,228.00 3,600.00 3,961.00 4,309.00
24,500.00 2,082.00 2,865.00 3,230.00 3,602.00 3,963.00
4,312.00 24,550.00 2,083.00 2,867.00 3,232.00 3,604.00
3,965.00 4,314.00 24,600.00 2,085.00 2,869.00 3,234.00
3,606.00 3,967.00 4,317.00 24,650.00 2,086.00 2,871.00
3,236.00 3,608.00 3,970.00 4,319.00 24,700.00 2,087.00
2,873.00 3,238.00 3,610.00 3,972.00 4,322.00 24,750.00
2,089.00 2,875.00 3,240.00 3,612.00 3,974.00 4,324.00
24,800.00 2,090.00 2,876.00 3,241.00 3,614.00 3,977.00
4,326.00 24,850.00 2,092.00 2,878.00 3,243.00 3,616.00
3,979.00 4,329.00 24,900.00 2,093.00 2,880.00 3,245.00
3,618.00 3,981.00 4,331.00 24,950.00 2,094.00 2,882.00
3,247.00 3,620.00 3,983.00 4,334.00 25,000.00 2,096.00
2,884.00 3,249.00 3,622.00 3,986.00 4,336.00 25,050.00
2,097.00 2,886.00 3,251.00 3,624.00 3,988.00 4,339.00
25,100.00 2,099.00 2,887.00 3,252.00 3,626.00 3,990.00
4,341.00 25,150.00 2,100.00 2,889.00 3,254.00 3,629.00
3,993.00 4,344.00 25,200.00 2,102.00 2,891.00 3,256.00
3,631.00 3,995.00 4,346.00 25,250.00 2,103.00 2,893.00
3,258.00 3,633.00 3,997.00 4,349.00 25,300.00 2,104.00
2,895.00 3,260.00 3,635.00 3,999.00 4,351.00 25,350.00
2,106.00 2,897.00 3,262.00 3,637.00 4,002.00 4,354.00
25,400.00 2,107.00 2,899.00 3,264.00 3,639.00 4,004.00
4,356.00 25,450.00 2,109.00 2,900.00 3,265.00 3,641.00
4,006.00 4,359.00 25,500.00 2,110.00 2,902.00 3,267.00
3,643.00 4,009.00 4,361.00 25,550.00 2,111.00 2,904.00
3,269.00 3,645.00 4,011.00 4,364.00 25,600.00 2,113.00
2,906.00 3,271.00 3,647.00 4,013.00 4,366.00 25,650.00
2,114.00 2,908.00 3,273.00 3,649.00 4,015.00 4,369.00
25,700.00 2,116.00 2,910.00 3,275.00 3,651.00 4,018.00
4,371.00 25,750.00 2,117.00 2,911.00 3,276.00 3,653.00
4,020.00 4,374.00 25,800.00 2,119.00 2,913.00 3,278.00
3,655.00 4,022.00 4,376.00 25,850.00 2,120.00 2,915.00
3,280.00 3,657.00 4,024.00 4,379.00 25,900.00 2,121.00
2,917.00 3,282.00 3,659.00 4,027.00 4,381.00 25,950.00
2,123.00 2,919.00 3,284.00 3,661.00 4,029.00 4,384.00
26,000.00 2,124.00 2,921.00 3,286.00 3,663.00 4,031.00
4,386.00 26,050.00 2,126.00 2,923.00 3,287.00 3,666.00
4,034.00 4,389.00 26,100.00 2,127.00 2,924.00 3,289.00
3,668.00 4,036.00 4,391.00 26,150.00 2,128.00 2,926.00
3,291.00 3,670.00 4,038.00 4,394.00 26,200.00 2,130.00
2,928.00 3,293.00 3,672.00 4,040.00 4,396.00 26,250.00
2,131.00 2,930.00 3,295.00 3,674.00 4,043.00 4,399.00
26,300.00 2,133.00 2,932.00 3,297.00 3,676.00 4,045.00
4,401.00 26,350.00 2,134.00 2,934.00 3,299.00 3,678.00
4,047.00 4,403.00 26,400.00 2,136.00 2,935.00 3,300.00
3,680.00 4,050.00 4,406.00 26,450.00 2,137.00 2,937.00
3,302.00 3,682.00 4,052.00 4,408.00 26,500.00 2,138.00
2,939.00 3,304.00 3,684.00 4,054.00 4,411.00 26,550.00
2,140.00 2,941.00 3,306.00 3,686.00 4,056.00 4,413.00
26,600.00 2,141.00 2,943.00 3,308.00 3,688.00 4,059.00
4,416.00 26,650.00 2,143.00 2,945.00 3,310.00 3,690.00
4,061.00 4,418.00 26,700.00 2,144.00 2,947.00 3,311.00
3,692.00 4,063.00 4,421.00 26,750.00 2,145.00 2,948.00
3,313.00 3,694.00 4,066.00 4,423.00 26,800.00 2,147.00
2,950.00 3,315.00 3,696.00 4,068.00 4,426.00 26,850.00
2,148.00 2,952.00 3,317.00 3,698.00 4,070.00 4,428.00
26,900.00 2,150.00 2,954.00 3,319.00 3,701.00 4,072.00
4,431.00 26,950.00 2,151.00 2,956.00 3,321.00 3,703.00
4,075.00 4,433.00 27,000.00 2,153.00 2,958.00 3,323.00
3,705.00 4,077.00 4,436.00 27,050.00 2,154.00 2,959.00
3,324.00 3,707.00 4,079.00 4,438.00 27,100.00 2,155.00
2,961.00 3,326.00 3,709.00 4,082.00 4,441.00 27,150.00
2,157.00 2,963.00 3,328.00 3,711.00 4,084.00 4,443.00
27,200.00 2,158.00 2,965.00 3,330.00 3,713.00 4,086.00
4,446.00 27,250.00 2,160.00 2,967.00 3,332.00 3,715.00
4,088.00 4,448.00 27,300.00 2,161.00 2,969.00 3,334.00
3,717.00 4,091.00 4,451.00 27,350.00 2,162.00 2,970.00
3,335.00 3,719.00 4,093.00 4,453.00 27,400.00 2,164.00
2,972.00 3,337.00 3,721.00 4,095.00 4,456.00 27,450.00
2,165.00 2,974.00 3,339.00 3,723.00 4,098.00 4,458.00
27,500.00 2,167.00 2,976.00 3,341.00 3,725.00 4,100.00
4,461.00 27,550.00 2,168.00 2,978.00 3,343.00 3,727.00
4,102.00 4,463.00 27,600.00 2,170.00 2,980.00 3,345.00
3,729.00 4,104.00 4,466.00 27,650.00 2,171.00 2,982.00
3,347.00 3,731.00 4,107.00 4,468.00 27,700.00 2,172.00
2,983.00 3,348.00 3,733.00 4,109.00 4,471.00 27,750.00
2,174.00 2,985.00 3,350.00 3,735.00 4,111.00 4,473.00
27,800.00 2,175.00 2,987.00 3,352.00 3,738.00 4,114.00
4,475.00 27,850.00 2,177.00 2,989.00 3,354.00 3,740.00
4,116.00 4,478.00 27,900.00 2,178.00 2,991.00 3,356.00
3,742.00 4,118.00 4,480.00 27,950.00 2,179.00 2,993.00
3,357.00 3,744.00 4,120.00 4,483.00 28,000.00 2,181.00
2,994.00 3,359.00 3,746.00 4,122.00 4,485.00 28,050.00
2,182.00 2,996.00 3,361.00 3,748.00 4,125.00 4,488.0028,100.00 2,184.00 2,998.00 3,363.00 3,750.00 4,127.00
4,490.00 28,150.00 2,185.00 3,000.00 3,365.00 3,752.00
4,129.00 4,492.00 28,200.00 2,186.00 3,001.00 3,366.00
3,754.00 4,131.00 4,495.00 28,250.00 2,188.00 3,003.00
3,368.00 3,756.00 4,133.00 4,497.00 28,300.00 2,189.00
3,005.00 3,370.00 3,758.00 4,136.00 4,500.00 28,350.00
2,190.00 3,007.00 3,372.00 3,759.00 4,138.00 4,502.00
28,400.00 2,192.00 3,009.00 3,374.00 3,761.00 4,140.00
4,504.00 28,450.00 2,193.00 3,010.00 3,375.00 3,763.00
4,142.00 4,507.00 28,500.00 2,194.00 3,012.00 3,377.00
3,765.00 4,145.00 4,509.00 28,550.00 2,196.00 3,014.00
3,379.00 3,767.00 4,147.00 4,512.00 28,600.00 2,197.00
3,016.00 3,381.00 3,769.00 4,149.00 4,514.00 28,650.00
2,199.00 3,017.00 3,382.00 3,771.00 4,151.00 4,516.00
28,700.00 2,200.00 3,019.00 3,384.00 3,773.00 4,153.00
4,519.00 28,750.00 2,201.00 3,021.00 3,386.00 3,775.00
4,156.00 4,521.00 28,800.00 2,203.00 3,023.00 3,388.00
3,777.00 4,158.00 4,524.00 28,850.00 2,204.00 3,025.00
3,390.00 3,779.00 4,160.00 4,526.00 28,900.00 2,205.00
3,026.00 3,391.00 3,781.00 4,162.00 4,528.00 28,950.00
2,207.00 3,028.00 3,393.00 3,783.00 4,164.00 4,531.00
29,000.00 2,208.00 3,030.00 3,395.00 3,785.00 4,167.00
4,533.00 29,050.00 2,210.00 3,032.00 3,397.00 3,787.00
4,169.00 4,536.00 29,100.00 2,211.00 3,034.00 3,398.00
3,789.00 4,171.00 4,538.00 29,150.00 2,212.00 3,035.00
3,400.00 3,791.00 4,173.00 4,540.00 29,200.00 2,214.00
3,037.00 3,402.00 3,793.00 4,175.00 4,543.00 29,250.00
2,215.00 3,039.00 3,404.00 3,795.00 4,178.00 4,545.00
29,300.00 2,216.00 3,041.00 3,406.00 3,797.00 4,180.00
4,548.00 29,350.00 2,218.00 3,042.00 3,407.00 3,799.00
4,182.00 4,550.00 29,400.00 2,219.00 3,044.00 3,409.00
3,801.00 4,184.00 4,552.00 29,450.00 2,220.00 3,046.00
3,411.00 3,803.00 4,186.00 4,555.00 29,500.00 2,222.00
3,048.00 3,413.00 3,805.00 4,189.00 4,557.00 29,550.00
2,223.00 3,050.00 3,415.00 3,807.00 4,191.00 4,560.00
29,600.00 2,225.00 3,051.00 3,416.00 3,809.00 4,193.00
4,562.00 29,650.00 2,226.00 3,053.00 3,418.00 3,811.00
4,195.00 4,564.00 29,700.00 2,227.00 3,055.00 3,420.00
3,813.00 4,197.00 4,567.00 29,750.00 2,229.00 3,057.00
3,422.00 3,815.00 4,200.00 4,569.00 29,800.00 2,230.00
3,058.00 3,423.00 3,817.00 4,202.00 4,572.00 29,850.00
2,231.00 3,060.00 3,425.00 3,819.00 4,204.00 4,574.00
29,900.00 2,233.00 3,062.00 3,427.00 3,821.00 4,206.00
4,576.00 29,950.00 2,234.00 3,064.00 3,429.00 3,823.00
4,208.00 4,579.00 30,000.00 2,236.00 3,066.00 3,431.00
3,825.00 4,211.00 4,581.00
Cite as OCGA ยง 19-6-15
History. Amended by 2014 Ga. Laws 579, ยง1 to ยง8, eff.
7/1/2014.
Amended by 2011 Ga. Laws 178, ยง1, eff. 7/1/2011.
Amended by 2010 Ga. Laws 624, ยง19, eff. 6/3/2010.
Amended by 2009 Ga. Laws 102, ยง2-2, eff. 7/1/2009.
Amended by 2009 Ga. Laws 32, ยง1 to ยง6, eff. 9/1/2009.
Amended by 2008 Ga. Laws 457, ยง8 and ยง9, eff.
5/6/2008.
Amended by 2008 Ga. Laws 457, ยง1 to ยง7, eff. 5/6/2008.
Amended by 2007 Ga. Laws 18, ยง19, eff. 5/11/2007.
Amended by 2006 Ga. Laws 650, ยง4, eff. 1/1/2007.
Amended by 2006 Ga. Laws 453, ยง19, eff. 7/1/2006.
Amended by 2005 Ga. Laws 52, ยง5, eff. 4/22/2005.