Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
KENTUCKY DIVORCE
STRATEGY MANUAL
BY DEAN H. SUTTON, ESQ.
© 2014, Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
Phone: (502) 625-0902
Email: divorce@bankruptcy-divorce.com
Address: 800 Stone Creek Parkway, Suite 6, Louisville, KY.
40223
Or visit us on the World Wide Web for Divorce, Child Support,
Child Custody, Adoption, Domestic Violence, Abuse and Neglect,
Wills/Power of Attorney, Unemployment, Criminal and DUI/Traffic
Information:
http://www.divorce attorneyky.com
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. A QUICK OVERVIEW OF THIS MANUAL 3
2. CHOOSING AN ATTORNEY 4
3. SHOULD YOU DIVORCE? 7
4. THE BASIC DIVORCE PROCESS 7
4.1. Temporary Orders 8
4.2. The Petition 8
4.3. The Answer 9
4.4. Discovery 10
4.5. Litigation, Mediation, and Marriage Settlement Agreements 10
4.6. Appeals and Modifying Orders 12
5. OTHER STEPS THAT MAY OCCUR IN THE DIVORCE PROCESS 13
5.1. Counseling 13
5.2. DVOS/EPOS 13
5.3. Contempt and Enforcement 13
6. THE TRUTH ABOUT DIVORCE 13
6.1. More On Tactics 15
7. PROPERTY AND MARITAL DEBT DIVISION 17
8. CHILD CUSTODY 18
8.1. Custody Statistics 18
8.2. Jurisdiction 19
8.3. Types of Custody 19
8.4. Determining Custody 20
8.5. Custody Litigation 21
8.6. Joint Custody 21
8.7. Modification 22
8.8. Allegations Of Child Abuse 22
9. CHILD SUPPORT 24
9.1. Jurisdiction 25
9.2. The Guideline Formulas 25
9.3. THe Kentucky Child Support Worksheet 26
9.4. Collecting Child Support 28
9.5. How to Collect 29
9.6. Collections and Hiding Income 32
10. CHILD VISITATION 33
10.1. Fixed Visitation 34
10.2. Supervised Visitation 34
11. FAQ AND APPENDIX SECTION 34
11.1. The Top 50+ Frequently Asked Questions at Our Office 34
11.2. Kentucky Statutes 46
11.3. Directions to Our Office 63
11.4. Directions to the Louisville Courthouse 63
11.5. IMPORTANT PHONE NUMBERS 63
11.6. STANDARD ATTORNEY CONTRACT 65
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
DISCLAIMER: THIS MANUAL IS A SOURCE BOOK CONTAINING GENERAL
INFORMATION ONLY. IT IS IMPOSSIBLE FOR ANY ATTORNEY TO GIVE YOU
SPECIFIC OR PERSONALIZED LEGAL ADVICE THROUGH A MANUAL: EVERY
PERSON’S LEGAL SITUATION IS DIFFERENT. THIS MANUAL IS INTENDED ONLY
TO GIVE YOU BASIC INFORMATION ON THE MOST COMMON PROBLEMS THAT
ARISE BEFORE, DURING, OR AFTER A DIVORCE; WAYS TO PREVENT THESE
PROBLEMS; AND METHODS YOU CAN USE TO PROTECT YOUR INTERESTS.
IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS ABOUT AN ACTUAL OR TENTATIVE DIVORCE,
PLEASE CONTACT US. SPECIFIC QUESTIONS ABOUT YOUR CASE SHOULD
ALWAYS BE DIRECTED TO A QUALIFIED ATTORNEY. AS WITH MOST
OTHER LEGAL CASES, IF YOU PROCEED WITHOUT A LAWYER , YOU
ASSUME ANY LIABILITY FOR PROBLEMS THAT OCCUR.
THIS MANUAL IS WRITTEN SPECIFICALLY FOR THE STATE OF KENTUCKY;
HOWEVER, MOST OTHER STATES HAVE SIMILAR RULES. YOU SHOULD
ALWAYS SEEK SPECIFIC ADVICE IF YOU LIVE IN ANOTHER STATE. SOME
STATES, SUCH AS CALIFORNIA AND LOUISIANA, HAVE VERY DIFFERENT
LAWS IN CERTAIN AREAS, SUCH AS DIVISION OF PROPERTY.
1. A QUICK OVERVIEW OF THIS MANUAL
My Name is Dean H. Sutton, and I have been a licensed attorney since 1990. I am a
former attorney for the Commonwealth of Kentucky and through my experience both
with the Commonwealth, working for other attorneys, and in my private practice, I have
handled cases originating in most areas of the Commonwealth. Today, I practice
primarily in Jefferson County, Kentucky and surrounding Kentucky counties, but I still
occasionally go outside of these counties when the need arises. I believe the information
in this manual will answer many of your questions about divorce and related topics and
will explain how to get the best results possible in Court.
There are some attorneys who might be upset if they knew I was sharing these secrets, but
my aim is to help you prepare and plan for your case and save you from unnecessary costs
and problems. I have written this manual so you will know everything I believe you
should know before you file for divorce. This Manual will periodically be updated to
keep up-to-date with the status of the law in Kentucky, so if you are only now thinking
about filing for divorce or, if in the future, you know someone who is thinking about
filing or who is actually going through a divorce, you may wish to re-refer to this Manual
and check for updates.
Please read this manual very carefully and completely if you are considering filing for
divorce. Some people read it more than once. If you spend just a couple of hours
learning, you may save money, gain primary physical custody of your children, and be
awarded (or avoid paying) maintenance (formerly known as alimony). If you do not
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
understand anything in the manual, please call or email us, and I will answer your
questions. Not only will you get the information you need, you will also let me know
what needs to be added to future editions of this manual. Your questions will help others
in the future and let me know what wasn’t covered.
There is nothing wrong with planning your divorce case. Understanding what
needs to be done makes it far more likely that you will have a successful outcome.
This manual was written for the benefit of my clients and others who are going through
the divorce process. The manual will give you some of the general information you need
should you wish to file a divorce action on your own behalf. I do not recommend that
you file for divorce on your own or at least not without consulting an attorney to look
over the agreements you are submitting to the Court. I especially wish to caution readers
of this manual against filing complicated property settlement agreements themselves.
2. CHOOSING AN ATTORNEY
One of the worst mistakes you can make in divorce, or any legal situation, is to use the
wrong attorney. Every attorney is an individual, and he/she will have strong and weak
points. One may prepare excellent paperwork and pay excellent attention to detail, while
the next may argue well on his feet but have no organization skills. Many states allow an
attorney to specialize in some area of practice, such as domestic law or bankruptcy.
(Generally, the law is interrelated—like a seamless web—so specialization may not
always be an advantage.) In Kentucky, attorneys are not allowed to say that they
specialize, but some Kentucky attorneys do limit their practice to a specific area or areas.
Neither good grades in law school nor a limited practice guarantees quality
representation. The best test you can give an attorney is to question him to determine
what he believes he can do to help you. If an attorney makes promises that sound too
good to be true, they probably are. If an attorney claims she can’t help you, she probably
can’t.
Expect to pay for your attorney’s time: Nothing is free. If you expect your lawyer to
work for free, be aware that you will usually get what you pay for! Your attorney has a
family to support and overhead such as his office to pay for. Most attorneys will simply
ignore a case that doesn’t pay. In the long run, you are better off paying a reasonable fee.
Most attorneys will charge from $200 to $300 per hour, I normally charge $175 per hour.
Some attorneys may ask for a lien on your home to secure payment; I typically do not. If
the attorney is not paid, he or she will normally drop you as a client; however, he or she
may finish your case but not put a full effort into it, which costs you more in the end. At
the same time the attorney should fully deliver if he or she is fully paid. Paying a lawyer
fairly—and having him or her bill you fairly—is worth it when compared to what is at
stake. Do not expect to pay an attorney a day before trial and have him or her fully
prepared, which may take him/her weeks or even months in advance to properly prepare,
acquire all necessary documents and witnesses, and discuss the best and most likely
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
outcomes with you. It is expensive to waste your attorney’s time, and your money, to
make small talk. Therefore, we encourage you to prepare thoroughly for meetings with
your lawyer. When meeting, try to stick to the direct subject matter of your divorce.
This is a check-list of issues you may want to discuss with your attorney:
 Custodial arrangements for the children
 Child support
 Future increases in child support
 Child neglect or abuse
 Education expenses for the children (including camps, religious schooling, and
college)
 Medical, dental, hospital, pharmacy, and psychological expenses for the children
 Income tax joint filings (who gets the refunds/who gets the liabilities)
 Tax exemptions (who claims the children on future returns)
 Motor vehicles, boats, or trailers
 Debts (who is responsible)
 Discovery of hidden assets and income
 Discovery of wasted or destroyed assets
 Non-marital vs. Marital Property
 Inheritances and pending lawsuits
 Dating and sexual relationships
 Safety of property, in general, and future payments of support
 Property Division (including 401K, Pensions, IRA, and QDRO)
 Investments (including partnerships, stocks, bonds, and savings)
 Corporations
 Proper security and protection regarding property division
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
 Personal property (furniture, collectibles, etc.)
 Bankruptcy issues (protection in case one spouse does go bankrupt)
 Temporary or Permanent Maintenance (Alimony)
 Attorney’s fees, Court costs, and Expert witness fees
 Clauses of indemnification, in case a spouse fails to live up to his or her
obligations
 COBRA or medical insurance for a former spouse
 Spousal abuse and restraining orders
 Restoration of a maiden name
Once you’ve chosen an attorney, follow his or her advice. He or she in turn owes you an
explanation of what he/she is doing and why he is doing it or not doing it. Always tell
your attorney the whole truth, disclosing any and all important facts about your case:
Your failure to advise your attorney of any facts may be legally fatal. Do not get trapped
into the mindset of, “Well my spouse is lying, so I am going to lie too.” Chances are you
are not smarter than the Judge who will hear your case and Judges (and to some extent
attorneys) have plenty of practice in determining who is lying to them and who is not.
If you change attorneys several times, you may indicate to the Judge that you are a
problem client and it may negatively affect how the Court perceives you. It may even
imply mental instability and, if the Court feels you are unstable, it could seriously damage
your chances of gaining the child custody or visitation arrangement that you seek.
Therefore, it is very important to pick a good attorney at the start of your case that you
stay with; to be open and honest with that attorney; and to follow his or her advice.
What you should expect from your attorney is that your legal work is done on time and
properly prepared. But your attorney is there only to protect you legally: He/she is not
your psychiatrist, therapist, or parent. Romantic relationships between divorce lawyers
and clients should be avoided and the Kentucky Bar Association even forbids attorney’s
from entering romantic relationships with their clients.
Don’t try to be your own attorney. It takes 3 years of legal training at a good law
school to even begin to think like one. You are far better off leaving the surgery to
surgeons and the legal work to attorneys. If you are dealing with important matters—
such as child support, custody, or major property division—a mistake can be costly. You
may lose custody, seriously damage you financial situation, or lose some other asset far
more valuable than the cost of an attorney. Even if you do some of the legal work on
your own, get assistance and have a lawyer review your documents.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
3. SHOULD YOU DIVORCE?
Before you file for divorce, you should at least consider whether or not you really should
divorce. Sometimes divorce seems like the only solution; however, confronting marital
difficulties may be an opportunity to resolve emotional and psychological problems that
are keeping you from having the relationship you deserve with your current spouse. It
may even take the initiation of a divorce to motivate some people to try and save a once
cherished relationship.
There are no good or bad marriages—only ones that work and ones that don’t work.
Marriages that do work are partnerships that help each person to grow. The noted social
worker Virginia Satir said that any marriage can be saved if both parties are willing to
work together toward that goal. If you are interested in counseling, you may want to
consult your attorney for the names of good qualified counselors. Don’t allow anyone,
even a lawyer, talk you out of a desired reconciliation, counseling, or therapy. In some
cases, an attorney may have his or her fees closer to heart than your happiness.
Unfortunately, not everyone is willing to work at a relationship or to support their spouse
emotionally, mentally, and spiritually. If you are sure your marriage does not work and
can’t be fixed, it is time to move on. Many marriages cannot be fixed because some
people will not change.
One of the first steps in preparing for your divorce is to realize that life is not over. Your
spouse thought you were worth being with and, after he or she is gone, someone else will
have that opinion, too.
4. THE BASIC DIVORCE PROCESS
The purpose of the divorce process is to end a marriage and decide issues such as child
custody, visitation, child support, maintenance (sometimes called spousal support and
formerly called alimony), and property and debt division. A divorce judgment can be
based on an agreement between the parties or result from a trial or hearing. An
agreement, or settlement, is usually less traumatic for you and your children, and is
usually far less expensive than a trial. Ultimately, most cases are resolved with a
settlement. Often, that settlement is reached through mediation, wherein the parties meet
with a Court appointed or chosen professional work toward an agreement that both can
live with. A divorce is technically called a “dissolution of marriage” in Kentucky and
most other states.
An overview of each step in the divorce proceedings is explained in Sections 4.1-4.6. If
you want to know step by step how to file an uncontested divorce a person merely needs
to:
 prepare and file a divorce petition,
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
 file a case data sheet (in most counties ),
 file the VS 300 and any local forms.
 prepare a Financial Case Disclosure Form (in most counties),
 file an entry of appearance signed by the spouse or at least serve the spouse with
the petition,
 file a marriage settlement agreement, if your won’t sign, you may be entitled to a
default divorce decree.
 wait 60 days if children were born of the marriage,
 attend parenting classes (required in most cases for both parents and children in
Jefferson and surrounding Counties).
 file the motion for a final hearing,
 pay for and schedule a Domestic Relations Commissioner’s hearing (not required
in most Kentucky Counties).
The process is a lot harder than it may seem and you may want to pay an attorney even for
an uncontested divorce.
4.1. TEMPORARY ORDERS
Temporary maintenance and child support start when either party, ask for them in a
“motion’ which is a request from the court. Temporary orders (also often called
“pendente lite” orders) provide for property settlement, maintenance, child custody,
visitation, and support while the case is being litigated. Temporary orders may also
include no, limited or supervised contact, restraining orders to prevent the disposal or
destruction of property. Temporary orders can be granted through hearings that are
usually held within a couple of weeks of the request, even if the divorce petition has not
yet been filed.
Motions for temporary support should be made as soon as possible, but your attorney will
rarely file until you ask him to do so. Ask for support early in the litigation. Child
support and maintenance will not start until these motions are filed. The support you
need will not start until your motion for support is filed and, if it isn’t filed, you
won’t get support until you get a final hearing deciding the terms of the divorce.
4.2. THE PETITION
A divorce begins with a Petition. Although all of the documents for an uncontested
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
divorce may be filed all at one time the petition must always be filed first. The Petition
notifies the Court, and your spouse, that you want to end the marriage. It also lists any
items you are asking for, such as child custody, child visitation, child support, spousal
support, property, and attorney fees. Normally, the Petition should include the maximum
you can possibly request; however, parties may make a marital settlement agreement later
for much less than what is demanded in the Petition.
In Kentucky, at least one of the parties must reside within the state for 180 days prior to
filing the Petition. If the parties have children, the parties must wait at least 60 days after
filing (and after the defendant spouse has been properly served) to have a final hearing.
This allows each party to submit testimony and proof, and finalize the divorce. This
“cooling off” (waiting) period is required for all families that have children.
The Petition must be properly served on your spouse. This means he or she must sign for
the Petition by certified mail, be served by a Sheriff, or file an entry of appearance.
If the divorce petitioner is seeking child support, custody, alimony, or property, the case
must be filed in a Court that has jurisdiction over the person or the item. Jurisdiction over
property is called “jurisdiction in rem”
. Jurisdiction over persons is called “jurisdiction in
personam”
. If there are children of the marriage, the Petition must be filed in the county
where the children live. Otherwise, technically, the Petition can be filed in any county of
the Commonwealth but may be subject to being transferred to another county if the
county selected is inconvenient for the spouse to appear in.
If your spouse cannot be found, you should ask that a warning order attorney be
appointed. This normally costs about $100. The Warning Order Attorney will write to the
last known address of the Respondent in an effort to locate him or her. If there is no
response, the Warning Order Attorney will file a report with the Court stating that the
person was not found. If there is a response, the Warning Order Attorney will file a
report with the Court stating that the person was found and served with notice of the
pending divorce or lawsuit. In either case, the divorce will go forward as if the person
had been served; however, if the person is served by a Warning Order Attorney, the Court
can only dissolve the marriage and grant custody. If the Court uses a Warning Order
Attorney for service of process, it cannot award child support or alimony.
4.3. THE ANSWER
After the Petition is filed, the other spouse (called the defendant or respondent) will file
an Answer. The Respondent may also file an “Entry of Appearance”, which certifies to
the Court that he/she agrees to jurisdiction and knows about the proceeding
If you are served with a Petition or Complaint, you must file your Answer within 20 days
or you may lose the right to present your side and a default judgment will be entered. If
there are no children involved, a default judgment may be entered after 20 days. If
children are involved, Kentucky requires a 60-day waiting period after the Respondent
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
has been served.
4.4. DISCOVERY
After the divorce Petition and Answer are filed, each party is entitled to information and
records from the other party. This is called “discovery”
. Discovery may involve a list of
questions known as “interrogatories” or a request for documents called a “request for
production”
. It may also include a deposition where you are asked questions in front of a
Court reporter. Discovery is done in preparation for trial: There is little or no need for
discovery in an uncontested divorce where all the facts are known. Discovery is most
often done in cases where assets may be hidden and the attorney is, in effect, “auditing”
the bookkeeping of the other side.
4.5. LITIGATION, MEDIATION, AND MARRIAGE SETTLEMENT
AGREEMENTS
To resolve a divorce, there are three options: Mediation, Litigation, or Settlement. In
many cases, one or more of these processes are used in combination to arrive at a final
agreement.
Mediation
When cases are contested (i.e., the two parties cannot agree on the terms), the Court will
often order a mediation conference. Voluntary compliance with Court orders is important
because enforcement procedures available from the Court are expensive and often don’t
solve the problems. For this reason, Courts often prefer and require the parties and their
lawyers to attend mediation where a Judge or mediator, with special training or
qualifications, help the parties reach an agreement. Although the mediator is not
supposed to give an opinion on how a Judge would likely rule on a particular point of
contention they often do. If one party realizes litigation would mean they would lose on
one or more issue, they may be persuaded to work out a compromise.
In Jefferson County, Kentucky, the Family Court requires a mediation conference before
a trial. Divorce mediation encourages both parties to set aside resentment and work
toward a solution that suits everyone. Divorce Mediators normally charge by the session
but you, your spouse, and your children have everything to gain if it works. Successful
mediation results in a final divorce agreement that both parties agree will work for them.
Mediation takes into consideration the needs and interests of everyone—including the
children. It is usually far less expensive and much quicker than traditional divorce
litigation. Coming to an agreement via mediation is a win/win situation for you and your
spouse and, where children are concerned, often a win/win/win situation!
Persons should mediate as soon as possible if a proper settlement can be reached.
However, even if a settlement is reached, there will be certain paperwork to process to
turn your agreement into a judgment and end your marriage.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
If you cannot reach an agreement, the Court will decide on matters of custody child,
support, visitation, alimony, and property division. Even then the matter may not end:
Appeals can go on for years.
How can everyone be a “winner” in a divorce? The answer may be to set aside your
anger, hurt, and resentment and agree to do what is best fair and proper for everyone
including the children and to divorce as reasonable adults
Litigation
In some cases, a contested divorce will be litigated in Court. A trial is the most
expensive, time-consuming, and (usually) unpleasant way to work out the details of a
divorce. There is no way of knowing how a Judge may rule, and it may leave both sides
with an undesirable outcome. However, when the two parties simply cannot agree, it is
the only alternative.
Litigation is risky. No one can predict the outcome of a trial, because there is no way of
knowing how the Judge or jury will think. Each Judge has a different viewpoint,
temperament, and values. Witnesses often change their testimony and may leave the
state.
You may ultimately “win” the case by litigation but, if you are financially and
emotionally drained after years spent embroiled in a bitter divorce, you still lose. Having
a Judge ultimately declare you are right may leave you with little satisfaction after the
time, energy, and money it took to get that decision. There may also be years of bitter
feelings after the divorce. In a hard fought divorce, everyone usually loses—especially
when children are involved. Also, spouses may be less likely to obey a court order they
disagree with rather than one they entered into by agreement.
Litigation may be done simply by depositions or affidavits. At a final hearing in a
contested divorce, each side will explain their side of the case to the Commissioner or
Judge and documents, witnesses, and exhibits will be placed into evidence.
Marriage Settlement Agreements
You are allowed to settle your divorce with your own marriage settlement agreement
under KRS 403.180. Normally, these agreements are incorporated into orders and
decrees of the Court and enforced in the same way as any other Court order. The Court
will honor the terms of your agreement unless the terms are unconscionable (completely
unreasonable). Even then, the Court should first allow the parties to revise the agreement
rather than make its own order: Agreement is that the parties have worked out with each
other are far more likely to be followed than something the Court forces the parties to live
with. It is rare that these agreements are disallowed, since bad bargains are not necessarily
unconscionable. The burden of proof to show that a bargain is unconscionable is on the
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
party trying to disprove the marital agreement.
Marriage Settlement agreements in Kentucky may grant child support differently than
what is outlined in the guidelines (see Section 9.2), but the couple must state in their
agreement that they have calculated and considered the guidelines. The Court, however,
has continuing jurisdiction over child custody, visitation, support, and maintenance and
can always change it later if there is a change in circumstances.
Although a lawyer may recommend a settlement proposal, the decision about that
proposal is yours.
Even if you agree on how to divorce, you must file that agreement with the Court so that
property and debt division, custody, support, visitation, and other matters can be made
into an official judgment. You should have an attorney review this document to insure it
is properly prepared from a legal perspective. The marriage settlement and the final
decree of divorce will set your child custody, support, visitation, property and debt
divisions. The settlement and the final decree, which sets out the findings of fact and
conclusions of law, are the most important documents in the divorce and must be
prepared and reviewed in detail.
Whether or not you and your spouse can settle by agreement, the Court must have a
hearing or submitted testimony so that it has the evidence on which to base its order. At
the final hearing, you will be asked certain questions so that the Commissioner or Judge
can enter his or her divorce decree.
4.6. APPEALS AND MODIFYING ORDERS
Just because you had a trial does not mean that the process is over. Appeals can be filed
and modifications can be made to the divorce agreement (especially in child custody,
support, and visitation matters) for years and years to come.
If you are unhappy with a judgment made by the Commissioner or the Court, you may
appeal to a higher Court. Normally, of course, you do have to appeal on a matter of
law—not just because you don’t like what the Court has ruled. Your spouse also has the
right to appeal any judgment.
RECONSIDERATION
Child support, custody, and visitation can always be modified at a later date since the
Court has continuing jurisdiction over the children. Modifications are made by a Judge, or
Commissioner after a hearing. Changes in the amount of child support can be granted or
custody and visitation rights can be modified. The rule for making a modification of
custody or visitation specifies that the change be in the best interests of the child and that
you show that there has been a change in circumstances. Some permanent orders are not
modifiable. Normally, the division of property is not subject to later modification unless
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
fraud is proven.
5. OTHER STEPS THAT MAY OCCUR IN THE DIVORCE
PROCESS
The following sections deal with items that may or may not be a part of your divorce
proceedings, depending on individual circumstances.
5.1. COUNSELING
Divorce-related counseling is required in Jefferson County for families with children.
Counseling should be a part of your divorce whether or not you are in litigation. There is
a natural time of grief and adjustment that all people go through when divorcing. The
process is especially hard on children. However, children under and over certain ages will
not be required to attend.
5.2. DVOS/EPOS
If there have been instances of domestic violence, emergency protective orders (EPOs) or
domestic violence orders (DVOs) can be requested. If a DVO or EPO is granted, a
criminal-like record for the offending spouse is made part of a nationwide computer data
bank. Many rights are lost for the subject of a DVO or EPO, including rights to purchase
or possess any firearm and/or work in some types of jobs. EPOs are almost always
granted if requested. Normally, no-contact restraining orders, which may restrain a
spouse from coming near or contacting the filing party, or even force them to move out of
the family home, are entered by the Court.
Like temporary orders for support (see Section 4.1), DVOs and EPOs are granted through
hearings that are usually held very quickly after the request, even if the divorce action has
not yet been filed.
5.3. CONTEMPT AND ENFORCEMENT
If a spouse refuses to pay support or other financial items dictated by the Court, tax
refunds can be seized and property, wages or bank accounts can be garnished. Property
can also be taken and sold. Orders for contempt can provide for jail time. Further, the
failure to pay child support for over 6 months or to fall behind more than $1000 is a
felony in Kentucky and punishable by up to 5 years in prison.
6. THE TRUTH ABOUT DIVORCE
The truth is, normally, divorces aren’t very nice. War is not fair, and divorces often seem
like WWIII. Sneak attacks and Blitzkrieg tactics are common, and often things happen so
fast, and with such unfairness, that one side gets all and the other gets nothing.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
Of course, every situation is different: Parties may be reasonable or spiteful. In some
cases, you may be able to work together and divorce as friends, and act in the best
interests of everyone. In other cases, a hard-line approach is the only choice. The other
party may have only their own self-interest- or even revenge- in mind and many
fundamental issues are at stake. When the Court become involved, you will lose control
on how your children are raised, how much money is spent on the children, who they will
live with, and even what church they will attend. Social workers or mental health
evaluators will normally become involved and their recommendations are often okayed
by the Judge.
If you expect WWIII, the best defense is to file early, hit hard, and be well prepared.
You should never sit back and let divorce be something that just “happens to you”. Don’t
be a passive victim of the system. Preparation and the right knowledge are key items:
For example, in almost half of all cases where a custodial parent receives no support, the
custodial parent simply failed to ask for it.
Spouses sometimes use any of the following unfair tactics to gain an advantage in a
divorce:
 Taking control of the financial assets by opening bank accounts in his/her name
only; closing accounts (including canceling utilities, credit cards, and insurance);
transferring ownership of items to his/her relatives; selling assets; charging up
accounts; and putting off or making repairs to property (in anticipation of a sale).
 Taking control of the financial records.
 Moving his or her residence often including the children to an other state and
filing for divorce first or after 6 months when the children become residents of
that state. In such cases, the first person to file the divorce wins. Also, when it
comes to support, mobile targets or targets that are out of state or out of the
country are hard to hit. If the Court lacks jurisdiction, and the other person is
in another state, support can be difficult or impossible to obtain.
 Reducing his or her income just before filing for divorce. This is done to reduce
income and increase necessary expenses, either to increase the amount of support
received or to show the inability to pay alimony or support.
 False EPO
 Using the other spouse’s “sins” against them. If you have vices, or a checkered
past, now is not the time to confess to or confide in your spouse or mutual friends.
What you tell your spouse can, and often will be, used against you.
 Moving and not allowing contact with children.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
Be aware of these tactics. If you think a divorce is forthcoming, protect yourself. If at all
possible, be the first to file and plan for it. Make sure you know where your assets are
and how much they are worth. Make sure you have access to bank accounts, financial
records, tax returns, and other important information. If you entrust these items
completely to your spouse, you may end up losing far more than his or her company.
6.1. MORE ON TACTICS
Starting your case as a friendly case may seem impossible, but it gives the Court a good
impression. It also allows you a chance to test how the other side will react to the filing
of the divorce. Ask yourself: Will it be a friendly divorce or an all-out war?
The key is to have a good strategy from the moment you file. For example, if you live in
a state where you would be awarded little in maintenance or marital property, you may
even move to another state to file the divorce.
Have Jurisdiction
In a case where one spouse moves to another state, the other may have to follow him or
her there to obtain child support. Jurisdiction is the power of the Court to order a person
to follow its ruling. A state has no jurisdiction over you unless you live in that state or
have substantial contacts with the state. Normally, a Court has no power over non-
residents; however, some persons mistakenly try to be their own attorneys and—by
answering lawsuits accidentally—agree to jurisdiction by default. Unless you specifically
deny jurisdiction early in the proceedings, you have agreed to it. Filing any answer or
signing any agreement in Court normally gives a state jurisdiction over a person.
In many cases, fathers have been made to pay support simply because they agreed to do
so when they were out-of-state residents and could have objected to jurisdiction. In
many cases, a Court may have jurisdiction to grant the divorce because one spouse is in
the state: It may grant child custody because the child is in the state, and it may even
grant property that is in the state, but it may not be able to grant child support because the
other spouse is out-of-state. What often happens is that the parent with the child files in
his or her home state and has the out-of-state parent served. If the out-of-state parent fails
to object to jurisdiction, or agrees to jurisdiction, he/she may be caught and dragged to the
child’s state every time the custodial parent wishes an increase in support. This is a major
disadvantage to the out-of-state parent who has to play the game as a visiting team.
These jurisdictional problems were more difficult long ago. Today, it is far easier to file
the case where the custodial parent resides and sue for child support in the state where the
obligated parent resides. Under the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act (UCCJA),
the Court assumes jurisdiction over the child if the child is in the state for more than 6
months. Under the Parental Kidnapping Prevention Act (PKPA), a subsequent suit for
custody cannot be filed, and the second state must defer to the first state. If the UCCJA
and the PKPA overlap, the PKPA takes priority. If a parent is not paying and lives out of
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
state the attorney general for one state may send the case to the other state for support
litigation in the other state.
File First
Another tactic often used is the rush to the Courthouse. The first to file often wins. By
filing for custody first, and getting a temporary award of custody first, one can obtain
custody early in the case and later argue that the child has been with you for the last
several months and should continue to be with you. There is also a psychological
tendency not to change things that we have already resolved. Therefore, it is a major
advantage to get a Judge to rule your way once: It is not likely that he or she will reverse
himself later. Delaying the decision as long as possible also allows you time to argue that
there has been no change in circumstances. The Judge will often be inclined to continue
the status quo.
Be Mature
Attaching affidavits to each request and motion allows you to tell the story of your
divorce case. Exaggerating your claims, bluffing, or doing anything that seems untruthful
will harm your case. The Court does not want to hear your complaints or what you think
is morally wrong with your spouse. It is only concerned about what is best for the
children, what the law is, and in processing the divorce. If you show up in Court
emotionally distressed, you will usually harm your own case. If you appear to be an
emotional wreck, it gives the Court the impression that you are in no shape to parent the
children. The children need someone who is psychologically stable and mature.
Your goal should be to show the Judge you want a fair and proper outcome. Do not say
the Judge unfair or doesn’t know what he’s doing—that can be suicide in Court. Even if
the Judge is unfair, you could eventually get a different Judge and the new Judge may be
concerned if you made problems for the last Judge.
Show Stability Responsibility
The most damaging testimony that can happen in a Divorce hearing when both parents
are almost equal is when one side proves that the other parent is unstable or cant provide
for himself or herself. If a parent cannot take care of himself he can’t be expected to take
care of a child. Although disabled mothers may often get alimony they may also lose
their children when they are so disabled that they can not reasonably take care of the
children and a father can take better care of them.
The children also need a home and someone which is stable and who is psychologically
and emotionally stable and mature. A home that is unstable where things are constantly
changing makes for a home where a child feels insecure. A parent that constantly
changes residences or that constantly changes jobs is not likely to be a person that has
settled down enough or that has the ability to parent properly.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
7. PROPERTY AND MARITAL DEBT DIVISION
Kentucky is not a community property state. Most community property states are in the
west: Texas and California are examples. Originally, these states were Mexican or
Spanish territory and have kept this aspect of Spanish law. This manual does not cover
community property and there is little practical use in explaining the distinction. Property
in both community property states and non-community property states is often similarly
divided as marital property; however, some differences may cause tax-related or other
problems. If you have a case in which some or all or your property is located in a
community property state, you should consult with a lawyer who knows the law of that
state. Community property considers all debts and property to be jointly earned and
owned.
Marital debts and property are the debts and property that are acquired by both parties
during the marriage. Debts and property given to or inherited by you alone during the
marriage, and the debts and property with which you came into the marriage, are non-
marital debts and property.
Non-marital property is not subject to division. Marital property is subject to division.
Most of the law defining how to split marital property comes from case law and cannot be
found in statutes; however, KRS 403.190 states that property is divided between the
spouses without regard to fault or misconduct.
In Kentucky, the Court first looks at each person’s contribution to acquiring the marital
property. [Smith v Smith 497 S.W.2d 418 (1973), Ratcliff v Ratcliff 586 S.W. 2d 292
(1979)] If you came into the marriage with non-marital property, that property should be
restored to you. The duration of the marriage is also a factor in deciding what property is
to be divided.
Second, the Court establishes the value of the property. The Court cannot guess what the
value of property is; therefore, the Court often has to rely on evidence, such as receipts,
that you supply to them. In some cases, the Court may order an appraisal or sell property
in order to divide it.
Third, the circumstances of each spouse are taken into account, including the need for
child support and alimony to be fully funded. [Williams v Williams Ky. 500 S.W. 2d 79
(1973)]
Finally, in cases where marital assets were wasted, hidden, or cannot be accounted for by
one spouse, the Court should lower that spouse’s part of the proceeds. [Robinette v
Robinette Ky. App. 736 S.W. 2d 351 (1987)]
As said before, marital property is the property that is acquired jointly. property can never be marital property:
Some forms of
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
 Personal Injury funds are not marital property. [Weakley v Weakley Ky. 731
S.W. 2d 243 (1987) and Reeves v Reeves, Ky. App 753 S.W. 2d 301 (1988)]
 Inherited property is not marital property. 661 (1978)]
[Angel v Angel Ky. App., 562 S.W.2d
 Gifts or welfare funds are not marital property [McGlone v McGlone, Ky., 613
S.W. 2d 419 (1981)]
 Increases in the value of property that was non-marital property is not marital
property [Daniels v Daniels, Ky. App 726 S.W. 2d 705. (1986)]
None of these items of property were acquired jointly; however, pensions are almost
always viewed as the product of a couple working together (if the pension was acquired
during the marriage). [Poe v Poe Ky. App 605 S.W. 2d 33 (1988)] Even if the pension is
not vested, it is still marital property subject to division.
Normally, marital property and debts are evenly divided, but in some cases marital
property may be used for child support or alimony, or to insure the payment of support.
Under Bruton v Bruton Ky. App 569 S.W. 2d 182 (1978), marital debts are ordinarily
divided the same way that marital assets are divided, but there is no presumption that a
debt incurred during the marriage is a marital debt. The Court may have to consider other
factors to see if a debt should be divided.
When property is fraudulently hidden or omitted from disclosure or the Court’s
consideration, the Court may reopen a case to divide the property. [Taylor v Taylor Ky.
App. 598 S.W. 2d 764 (1978)] When a mistake has been made in dividing marital
property, rule 60.02 will allow the Court to reconsider the division later. This is rare,
however, and your attorney should never have to do this. It is important to do your
divorce case properly the first time with a qualified attorney.
8. CHILD CUSTODY
Statistically, when parents refuse to work together to raise the children or when one
parent denies visitation to the other, the children are far more likely to be divorced
themselves, or have other problems (emotional, behavioral, etc.) in the future. It is
almost always best to work together as partners, even after a divorce, to raise your
children.
8.1. CUSTODY STATISTICS
Custody is agreed to without litigation in 90% of all cases. In 60-70% of those cases,
mothers are awarded child custody. In about 18% of the agreed cases, the father gets
custody. Joint custody occurs in around 18% of these cases.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
The statistics are different if custody is decided by the Court. Only about 2-5% of cases
are left to a Judge to decide custody. Women, however, lose custody in about 40% of the
cases that do go to trial.
In litigated cases, over 82 % of all women want sole custody while 15% want joint
custody. About 33% of all men want sole custody while 35% want joint custody.
8.2. JURISDICTION
If you are asking the Kentucky Court to award child custody in a divorce, the child must
have lived within Kentucky within the last 180 days and be a resident of Kentucky. If the
child has lived in Kentucky for 6 months, Kentucky becomes the home state of the child
and Kentucky can award custody of the child to either party.
8.3. TYPES OF CUSTODY
There are several different types of custody we will refer to in the next few sections.
Here are brief explanations of each:
 Temporary Custody may be granted until the parties receive a final order of
divorce or until they are granted a permanent custody order.
 Permanent Custody is normally decided mutually by the parties, along with
visitation rights, and is part of the final divorce settlement or decree. Only 2-5%
of the time do parties fully litigate in Court to determine custody.
 Legal Custody is the right to make decisions about matters involving the child,
such as his religious upbringing, schooling, and medical care.
 Physical Custody is the right to have the child with you.
 Sole Custody is when only one parent has custody of the child. If the parents
cannot agree to work together to raise the child, or one parent has a problem (such
as mental instability) that prevents him or her from being a parent, the Court may
award sole custody to one parent.
 Joint Custody is an arrangement that allows both parents to work together as
partners in raising the child. In joint custody arrangements, a “primary caregiver”
will still receive child support from the other parent.
A person can have physical custody, yet not have legal custody of a child, and vice-versa.
Normally, the parent without physical custody has visitation rights. The person awarded
physical custody is called the “custodial parent”. The person paying child support is the
“non-custodial” parent. The custodial parent is normally given the tax deduction unless
they sign away the deduction on IRS form 8332. Signing 8332 is required to get the
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
deduction.
8.4. DETERMINING CUSTODY
Child custody is determined by what is deemed to be “in the best interests of the child”
.
What is best for the child is, usually, that he or she be in the home that is the best
environment for him or her. Ideally, the child should have both parents, in a loving
relationship, who provide a good model of a successful family. When a divorce is
unavoidable, all efforts should be made to continue as stable and loving an environment
as possible.
Common factors that influence custody include:
 The stability of an individual parent, including residence, job, and emotional or
mental status and stability.
 The ability of the parent to provide a nurturing environment. Also the ability and
the desire of a parent to provide for a child. A parent with a disability or a parent
that is addicted is not available or able to care for a child. Even if the parent is
able the parent may not be willing and have a history of poor caring.
 The individual needs of the child and, possibly, the wishes of the child (if he or
she is old enough to express these wishes).
 The amount of time the child has spent with the parent prior to the divorce and the
attachment of that child to the parent’s established residence.
 Psychological evaluations of the parties: drinking or drug problems, history of
abuse or violent behavior, or mental or psychological illness and instability may
keep a parent from gaining custody.
 How the child behaves and reacts in one home or the other, including how school
grades and behavior are affected.
 Practicality: In some cases it just isn’t practical for one parent to be the custodian.
Practical factors can include work schedules, physical disabilities, etc.
 The ability of the parent to provide for the child: funds for education, insurance,
income, etc.
 What kind of model the parent sets for the child
The gender of the parent is not supposed to enter into the Judge’s consideration; however,
women still tend to receive custody more often than men.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
8.5. CUSTODY LITIGATION
Custody disputes are very emotional and often involve allegations of abuse. These
situations require a cool head on the part of the attorney representing you—and a
knowledge of psychology that many attorneys and Judges lack. Often, the parent who is
better able to afford the fight, and who has the most determination to win at all costs, will
get custody.
Many Judges require the parents to participate in mediation if they cannot agree to
custody. Often investigations are performed by social workers or psychologists. These
investigations may include interviews with the parents, the children, teachers, daycare
providers, neighbors, doctors, and anyone else who is involved with the children. an investigation is concluded, a report with recommendations is given to the Court. Once
The
Judge may either follow these recommendations or disregard them and reach his or her
own conclusions from all the surrounding facts.
Child custody battles often involve thousands of dollars and months or years of “wearing
down the other side” in bitter and hotly-contested fights. If both parties can agree to do
what is best for the children, it is better to do so than proceed with litigation. Often, what
is best is a joint custody arrangement. Parents that jointly raise a child are far more likely
to have a happy, healthy child.
8.6. JOINT CUSTODY
In joint custody cases, parents make decisions about their children together. Many studies
have shown that, if the parents must divorce, they are far better off if they work together
to raise the children: Child support is more likely to be paid on time and in full, the
children are less likely to have psychological and emotional problems, they are less likely
to divorce themselves and the children will have higher levels of self-esteem than when
one parent does not participate. Divorce also creates a whole new set of child-rearing
issues, which are best answered by both parents working together. As a result Judges
normally rule for joint custody in Kentucky; however, they can and do rule for sole
custody in cases where joint custody is not appropriate. Joint custody is not right for
every family situation.
There is no standard joint custody arrangement that you have to follow. Some parents
alternate weeks with the children, while others alternate months. Still others have a
week/weekend arrangement. You are not required to divide the children’s time with each
parent equally, but time divisions should be in the best interests of the child. Usually, it is
better to work out an agreement between yourselves than to let the Court decide.
Even if you have joint custody, you can often enjoy all the rights and most of the rewards
of sole custody by being the “primary caregiver”
. Often,
“joint” custody will be like
having sole custody simply because one person will normally have physical custody of
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
the child most of the time and will therefore still have to make most decisions about the
child. If the mother is the primary caregiver, this gives her, in effect, the best aspects of
sole custody: She will have the child living with her and will be responsible for the
child’s day-to-day care and environment. In such cases, allowing the other side to have
joint custody is more for diplomatic, rather than practical, reasons and may encourage the
other party to help with the child, make timely child support payments, and meet other
obligations. Studies show repeatedly that custodial parents will often fail to ask for child
support in an effort to obtain control of the child: In over 40% of all cases, they will fail
to ask for, and may never be paid any, child support.
Unfortunately, the custodial parent will sometimes want revenge much more than what is
best for the child. This is a fatal flaw in logic for many men and women involved in
divorce litigation. With joint custody arrangements, the primary caregiver is far more
likely to receive child support on time and in full. Parents that do not get custody, or are
barred from visitation, rarely pay support or have “spotty” histories of payment (i.e., late,
insufficient, or sporadic payments). When one parent denies visitation, the other parent
often feels angry and defeated and, often, withdraws completely from family obligations
including paying support. The custodial parent is far better off finding a way for the other
parent to be as much a part of the child’s life as is practically possible.
8.7. MODIFICATION
The only thing certain in child custody is that nothing is certain. Child custody can
change. Modification of child custody involves many of the same factors considered in
determining custody initially.
To modify sole custody, there must be a significant change in circumstances that
seriously affects the child. Since joint custody does not involve a judgment of which
parent is more suited to care for a child, if one of the joint custodians later asks the Court
for sole custody, it is litigated all over again—with no preference to one parent or the
other. Factors that can trigger modification include moving, remarriage, custodial or
visitation interference, substance addictions, and allegations of abuse. Judges are
reluctant to make changes in custody unless there has been a drastic or significant change
in circumstances.
8.8. ALLEGATIONS OF CHILD ABUSE
Abandonment, endangerment, physical abuse, emotional abuse, neglect, or sexual
abuse—or any combination of these—is considered abuse. Abuse of a parent can also be
considered abuse of a child: Children do not see themselves as separate from their
parents so, when a child lives in a home where a parent is being abused, the child fears
for his or her own safety.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
3,000,000 cases of child abuse are reported each year. 1/3 of these are substantiated,
which means that some evidence was found that would suggest that the abuse does exist,
but less than 1/3 are actually proven. From 1976 to 1993, child abuse accusations rose by
333% and reports of sexual abuse rose by 1400%. Allegations of child abuse are serious.
Unfounded or false claims are harmful to the children yet about ½ of all claims are false
according to a Courier Journal article that investigated the Louisville judicial system.
Judges and lawyers will try to protect children from a parent who is an abuser; however,
Judges are unlikely to detect false claims and may harm the child by granting custody to
the parent that fraudulently claims abuse. Parents that make false reports are, in a very
real sense, abusive themselves. They have put the best interests of their children second
to their own desire to gain custody, child support, and property, or seek revenge against
their spouse.
False Allegations of Child Abuse
Child abuse allegations are a two-sided problem: It is difficult to prove real abuse, but it
is also difficult to defend yourself against a false allegation when you are presumed guilty
by many persons and there is no tangible proof of your innocence.
Claims of child abuse or spousal abuse are often used to gain a tactical advantage. The
Louisville Courier Journal reported that about half of all substantiated claims are false:
Bruises can be self-inflicted or accidental. Children may deny abuse when it did happen
or claim that abuse happened when it didn’t in order to punish a parent and gain pity or
attention.
Making a false claim allows a parent to get revenge, gain tactical advantages, and obtain
custody, support, property, and alimony—all in one blow—while often destroying the
other spouse’s life and relationship with the children. Although our legal system states,
as a rule, a presumption of innocence, if you are charged with child abuse, you will be
treated as guilty until you can prove your innocence. It is extremely difficult to prove a
negative.
If You Are Accused of Child Abuse
If allegations are made against you, social workers will investigate. If any possible
evidence is found, they will take your children. If a case-worker removes a child from a
parent’s home, the social agency is protected by civil immunity; however, if they fail to
remove the child, and the child is then harmed, the social agency may be sued. Therefore,
agencies are likely to remove children to limit their own liability.
If accused, your name will go into state and federal databanks of abusers. Once you are
in this databank, you will probably never get out of it even if you are proven innocent.
The purpose of the databank is to track abusers and prevent them from becoming
adoptive parents or from being in any position where they are trusted with children.
Employers in day-care facilities, for example, may use the databank to check for
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
violations and allegations. allegation may brand you as an abuser.
You do not have to be found guilty to be in the databank: Any
If Your Spouse Abuses You or Your Children
If your spouse abuses your child or you, you must make your own and your children’s
safety your highest priority. Children that stay in a home environment of abuse learn to
accept abuse as a way of life and pass this on to their children. Abuse not only affects the
immediate safety of you and your children, it affects the long-term mental, psychological,
and physical health of children and grandchildren as they continue to repeat the conduct
of their fathers and mothers.
Kentucky requires everyone but an individual’s own attorney to report any information
regarding child abuse. If you talk about suspected or alleged abuse with your attorney, he
or she is not required to report it if the information came out in the context of attorney
and client privilege. If you tell anyone else—including a doctor, priest, minister, or
rabbi—they are required to report you and be a witness against you. Any person who
fails to report abuse may be prosecuted the same as if they committed the abuse. The
failure of a parent to report abuse IS abuse in Kentucky. If you fail to report abuse
done by your spouse, you may have your own rights to your child terminated or be
prosecuted equally with the abuser.
Guardian ad litem
In cases of abuse, or when the minor has his or her own money or assets, a guardian ad
litem may be appointed. This person is an attorney who represents the child. At trial, the
Guardian is there to insure that the child is legally protected in any situation where the
parents may place the child at risk. Children rarely give testimony at trial because they
are minors. Older children, however, may be allowed to voice their concerns at trial.
9. CHILD SUPPORT
Child support may be agreed upon by the parents, set by the Child Support Guideline
Chart, or determined by a Judge (if unusual circumstances exist that allow him to
disregard the chart). In most cases, it is most important to get support in place and started
immediately. The amount of support can be increased later. Child Support and
Alimony starts from the date it is requested by filing a motion in court by you
asking for it and filing the motion. It is therefore important to ask for it in a motion as
early as possible most attorneys fail to ask for it until months after you have filed the
divorce which cuts out months of your child support. If you want your child support it is
up to you to make certain that a motion for child support is filed with the petition for
divorce. Although you may not get child support for some time it will start to accrue
from the day you file the motion.
In Kentucky, child support is enforceable by statute until the child has reached the age of
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
18. Children are also supported by statute to age 19 if they do not graduate from high
school before that age. However, the parties may agree to support a child through
college. Other states may require support to age 21.
A child support order is a Court-ordered debt. The statute of limitations in Kentucky for
this debt is normally 20 years. The person paying support may therefore be required to
produce records to show proof of payment up to 20 years later if official records are lost
or destroyed. It is recommended that the paying parent keep all records in a safe place for
at least 20 years after each payment is paid.
Child support is not tax-deductible. Alimony is tax deductible. Parties should work
together, allowing the paying parent to pay more support as alimony to reduce his or her
tax bill and top maximize deductions if alimony and child support is ordered.
9.1. JURISDICTION
To award child support, the state must have jurisdiction over the person being ordered to
pay support. In an effort to get child support, persons outside Kentucky are often directly
sued in Kentucky Courts. If they answer the complaint without properly denying
jurisdiction, they are treated as if they agree to Kentucky jurisdiction and will have to pay
support. The paying spouse must agree to jurisdiction, file an answer agreeing to
jurisdiction, sign an agreement, or be a resident of Kentucky. If the spouse
disagrees with jurisdiction, he or she must clearly deny jurisdiction or he agrees to
it. If your spouse lives in another state, you may have to sue him or her in that state to
get alimony or child support. If the parent is constantly moving from state to state, it may
be nearly impossible to locate a moving target and collect.
9.2. THE GUIDELINE FORMULAS
Child support is normally determined by the Child Support Guideline Chart, but parties
can ignore the amount in the chart and agree upon a different (reasonable) amount if they
choose to do so. If the parties cannot agree on the amount, the Judge must award child
support according to the CSGC. The Judge may disregard the CSGC and set another
amount, but must show that there were strong reasons to deviate from the chart—such as
a disabled child with higher support needs.
The guideline formulas are based on the paying parent’s income. The expenses that the
obligated spouse has, including later children or spouses, are not considered. The paying
parent can be given a deduction for other ordered child support, alimony, and/or health
insurance.
Child Support is calculated based on gross income. Gross income is any income from
any source, before taxes and other deductions. SSI or welfare payments are included as
income. Reasonable business expenses may be deducted from a self-employed person’s
income. The child’s health insurance, any child support for other children, and alimony
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.9.3. Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
are subtracted from the calculation. If income is off-the-chart, it is estimated based on a
mathematical calculation of what the chart would say at that income level.
The Court must order health insurance. Unpaid medical expenses are paid in proportion
to income. Daycare costs are covered as part of child support costs.
Reasons for deviation from the chart can include the child’s needs (including education,
medical expenses, and special needs), parental job training, parental education, and
parental disability. There is a catchall provision for deviation from the chart, but the
Judge must issue a written finding for any deviation.
No new increase or decrease in child support is allowed unless there is a material change
in circumstances. A 15% increase in income is a material change in circumstances, but
less than a 15% change is not.
If the parent attempts to avoid payment by not working voluntarily, his or her income may
be “imputed”
. In other words, he or she pays child support on what he or she should be
earning. Imputed income is based on what the income would be if the person were
working normally. Not working at the job level you should be is treated as being
voluntarily under-employed. For example, a doctor who quits to work as a grocery stock-
boy will still be required to pay the child support he or she would pay as a doctor.
THE KENTUCKY CHILD SUPPORT WORKSHEET
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE
1. Enter each parent’s gross monthly income.
2. Enter the amount actually paid for Court ordered maintenance for prior spouse(s) plus the amount of
maintenance ordered in the current proceeding.
3. Enter the amount of child support that is:
a. paid pursuant to a Court/administrative order for prior-born children;
b. paid, but not pursuant to a Court/administrative order, for prior-born children for whom the
parent is legally responsible; and
c. imputed for prior-born children residing with the parent.
4. Subtract any amounts on lines 2 and 3 from the amounts on line 1. If the result is less than 0, enter 0.
5. Add the amounts on line 4 in columns A and B to obtain the combined monthly adjusted parental gross
income.
6. Divide each of the amounts on line 4 by the total amount on line 5. Enter the percentages.
[NOTE: If the non-custodial parent (NCP) has 100% of the combined monthly adjusted parental gross
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
income, use the CS-71.1 to calculate the child support obligation. KRS 403.211(7)(b) provides a reduction
in gross income for the entire amount of health insurance premiums incurred for the child(ren) when a
parent has 100% of the combined monthly adjusted parental gross income].
7. Determine the base support obligation by referring to the Guidelines Table using the combined monthly
adjusted parental gross income as entered on line 5C and the number of children for whom the parents share
a joint legal responsibility.
8. Enter the monthly payment for child care costs.
9. Enter the monthly payment for the child(ren)’s health insurance.
10. Add lines 7, 8 and 9. This is the total monthly child support obligation.
11. Multiply line 10 by 6A and 6B for the monthly obligation of each parent. These amounts include each
parent’s share of child care costs and health insurance premium costs if these costs were included on lines 8
or 9.
12. If the NCP pays either of the amounts listed on lines 8 or 9 to the provider, enter that amount on line 12.
If the NCP pays both of these amounts, add these amounts together and enter the total on line 12. [NOTE: If
the NCP is paying 100 percent of either or both of these costs, then the NCP subtracts this amount from
his/her monthly obligation, which reduces the amount he/she pays to the custodial parent (CP). Subtracting
100 percent includes the NCP’s percentage of these expenses and also compensates the NCP for paying the
CP’s percentage of these costs].
13. Subtract line 12 from line 11 and enter the amount. This is the amount the NCP pays to the CP. (To
calculate a weekly amount, multiply line 13 by 12 and divide by 52.)
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
Column A: Custodial
Parent
Column B: Non-
custodial Parent
Column C: Both Parents
1. Monthly Gross Income
2. Deduction for
maintenance payments
3. Deduction for other
child support for prior-
born child(ren)
4. Adjusted monthly
income
5. Combined monthly
adjusted parental gross
income
6. Percentage of
combined monthly
adjusted parental gross
income
7. Base monthly support
8. Child care costs
9. Child(ren)’ s health
insurance premium cost
10. Total child support
obligation
11. Each parent’ s
monthly child support
obligation
12. Subtract child care
costs or health insurance
premiums paid by NCP to
the provider
13. Amount the NCP
pays to the CP
9.4. COLLECTING CHILD SUPPORT
In Kentucky, failure to pay child support for more than 6 months, or falling over $1,000
dollars behind in support, is a class D felony and is punishable by up to 5 years in prison.
Being prosecuted for the failure to pay support is extremely serious. Failure to pay
support of any amount is also punishable by the Court as contempt and as a misdemeanor.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
Property—including houses, bank accounts, and wages—can be attached and sold to
recover unpaid child support. Government benefits—including tax refunds and VA,
Social Security, and disability payments—can also be attached. In addition, attorney fees
may be added to the child support bill and recovered. Often these attorney fees may be
more than the actual child support that is owed. (Although attorneys cannot charge a
contingency fee in a divorce case, they may charge a contingency fee for collecting past
due child support.) Child support and alimony are not bankruptable and are the only
debts that can put you in jail.
Only 51% of non-custodial parents in the US pay support on time according to the
Census. 24% pay partially. 25% of all custodial parents get nothing at all. Kentucky has
about the same delinquency rate as Florida and four times New Mexico’s rate. Indiana
has the worst delinquency rate in the United States—twice as delinquent as Kentucky.
The statistics can be confusing, and differ from source-to-source.
Some parents do not pay ordered child support because they are unable to and others fail
to pay out of a desire for revenge and retaliation for what they think are unfair court
orders. . In some cases, payments are even refused by the custodial parent. Although
many people (particularly the media) berate “deadbeat dads” that fail to pay, the majority
of non-payment is actually caused by the failure of the custodial parent to demand child
support. 40% of all custodial parents (still most often women) fail to receive support
simply because they didn’t request it when they separated or divorced. If you want child
support, you must ask for it early in your case!
Non-custodial parents that have joint custody or visitation rights are twice as likely to pay
support as those that have no visitation; however, the law requires you to pay child
support even if you do not have visitation and even if you are in jail.
The Office of Child Support Enforcement locates non-paying parents 70 to 80% of the
time. Every state is required to have a child enforcement agency of its own. Several
federal laws outline how to collect child support, even if the parent moves to another
state. The Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act (URESA), the Revised
Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act (RURESA), and the Uniform Interstate
Family Support Act (UIFSA) all outline how child support can be enforced even if the
spouse flees. Non-paying parents can be located by Social Security records, vehicle and
driving records, IRS records, veteran records, criminal records, and credit checks. Both
civil contempt and criminal non-support can be used to prosecute. Collection agencies
may be used to collect, the debt may be reported on the debtor parent’s credit report, and
the debtor may have his or her driver’s license revoked.
9.5. HOW TO COLLECT
People who say you can’t get blood from a stone simply don’t understand child support
collections. Every person has to have assets or income to exist. Income can be attached,
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
even if it is an inheritance. If any income or asset exists, it can be taken away by
child support collections. Kentucky child support collections can even attach Social
Security funds or have an employer deduct child support directly from a paycheck. In
addition, some states allow the debtor’s driver’s license to be taken away.
You cannot expect the federal government (or most state agencies) to effectively collect
for you because it costs the federal government more to collect than what it collects. As a
result it doesn’t seriously support collections. In 1994 alone, over $34 billion was owed
to Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) in overdue and uncollected child
support. The AFDC has failed in collections ever since it started in the 1970s: In 2000
the agency collected $8.9 billion in child support, but spent $9.4 billion to collect that
amount. The federal child support collections program is ineffective, and the money
often never gets to the children in the long run. As a result, the federal government
doesn’t seriously attempt to collect.
Child support collections programs are presently understaffed and under funded, so using
a private attorney to collect may be a far better method than waiting in line at the welfare
office, hoping they will eventually get to your case.
In one case where we represented a man in Indiana, Kentucky failed to get jurisdiction
over him and child support was never set. That was in 1999. He had not paid since the
child was born and, at that time, the child was age 14 in 1999. By pleading a lack of
jurisdiction (and moving) the man has never had to pay child support. A large part of our
ability to win that case was that the County attorney’s office represented the other side.
He was so overwhelmed with cases that they couldn’t properly defend and collect the
case. Because the County attorney’s office was handling the child support matter, the
man has been able to avoid child support for what is now 17 years. This would never
have happened if the attorney had filed for child support in the state where the man lived.
If you want to collect (or if you do not want to pay) child support, you should use private
counsel. If you use a state agency, you may get what you pay for.
Locating the Person Who Is Not Paying Child Support
If you are trying to locate a child support obligator, you need information. Having most
or all of the following information will be a great asset. You should know his or her
 name, and any alias(es) he or she uses
 birth date
 Social Security number
 most recent address
 past addresses
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
 work history (or, if self-employed, his or her customer’s or client’s names)
 present and past phone numbers
 driver’s license number
 past spouses
 existing child support debts to other persons
 family members
 creditors
 banks
 club memberships or hobbies
 real estate holdings
 insurance company
 military service record
 voter’s registration
 criminal records and probation officers
These records provide a trail to find the child support debtor. At the start of your case,
you should know all these things.
You can use telephone directories, associations, reverse lookup directories, post offices,
utility companies, credit reports, and other government records (such as IRS and Social
Security) to track down a person and collect. You may need to contact relatives,
landlords, fellow employees, employers, and neighbors.
Ways to Collect
You can find assets for child support through credit reports. The Court can attach wages
or personal property, including bank accounts or real estate, and sell it in any state. The
Court can subpoena records of the debtor and examine him by deposition.
You can collect through the IRS by attaching tax refunds—and even have the IRS collect
for you (acting as a “free attorney”) using methods called 1099 and 1098 procedures.
Often a person will pay when the IRS is collecting, even if they wouldn’t pay after being
jailed.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
AFDC may also collect for you. Social Security, military benefits, unemployment,
disability payments, VA benefits, and other benefits can be attached.
Statutes 5 CFR 2635.809 and 735.203 say that federal employees cannot be overdue in
payments on a debt, and a federal agency will assist you in collections from a federal
employee. (Federal employees can be dismissed from their positions for having an
unpaid child support debt.) There is even a procedure for garnishing child support from a
federal employee, but you must follow it exactly. To collect from a federal employee,
locate the person through the federal employee locator 1-800-688-9889 or
www.fic.info.gov, contact the agency he or she works for, and send in the wage
withholding form. This form must be filled out absolutely correctly, or they will return it
unpaid.
If you don’t want to collect child support yourself, you may collect it through your state
child support enforcement agency. Each state is required to have a child support
collection agency. In Kentucky, the agency is Division of Child Support Enforcement,
P.O. Box 2150, Frankfort, KY 40602. Their phone number is 1-800-248-1163. If you
need more information about child support collections, or increasing your child support,
contact us.
9.6. COLLECTIONS AND HIDING INCOME
Being run by an accountant/attorney, our office quickly learned how to find hidden assets.
It is a skill few attorneys’ have, but we will share a few of the secrets here. Certain
things leave clues. Sometimes it takes a CPA or auditor to find hidden income. You can
find a lot of assets, if you know how to look.
Compare Lifestyle
First, look at the lifestyle of the parent. It may be that many alleged business expenses
are being used as personal income. A Cancun business trip or a Lexus business car are
perfect examples of how personal expenses are charged to a company, and deducted from
taxes as business expenses, to lower taxable income. Examine expenses to see if they are
inflated by personal or unusual expenses. Remember: Taxable income is not gross
income for child support purposes.
If the lifestyle doesn’t match the reported income, and isn’t paid for by a business, then it
must come from borrowed money, inheritances, criminal activity, or unreported income.
Examine Expenses
Certain expenses are easily verified and match the volume of a business. For example, if
you know how many supplies are purchased and how much inventory is held, then the
true amount of sales can be determined from the markup. Utilities, such as water or
electricity, often have a direct relationship to the amount of sales.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
Inspect Records
How are records kept? If there are good records, they tend to prove whether or not the
income is there; however, people in some professional and self-employed occupations
may easily hide income and assets. If the person that owns the business does the records
and the bookkeeping, can the records be trusted? Is the person paid directly instead of the
business being paid? Often records may reveal other income sources or businesses you
don’t know about.
Standards for Similar Persons
The income of the person or business should generally match that of similar businesses.
If other attorneys make $100,000 a year, why is he or she only making $20,000? If it
costs other plants $2.00 to make a light, why does it cost your ex-spouse $5.00? Why is
there no profit for a business with substantial sales? Compare the gross profit margins of
other like businesses: Large variances may indicate fraud.
10. CHILD VISITATION
If you are involved in a divorce, it is important for you to know that visitation is
important to your child. If one parent denies visitation, the child may see them as being
unfair to the other parent. Denying visitation often backfires against parents in their
relationships with their own children. A child that does not see both parents may feel
unloved, undeserving of love, or may have low self-esteem. Parents that do not get
visitation pay child support poorly. Children that see their parents divorcing, not visiting,
and not paying child support often become fathers or mothers who divorce or abandon
their own children. These cycles repeat in families—often for generations. Protecting a
child, while seeing to it that visitation is reasonable, is an obligation of the custodial
parent.
The normal child visitation awarded to the non-custodial parent is two weeks during the
summer, alternate weekends, and alternate holidays. Parties may agree to any other
reasonable visitation schedule. When the term reasonable visitation is used in a divorce
order, the Court hopes that the parties can be adult enough to agree to a schedule. As
needs change, the parties can change the schedule as appropriate for the best interests of
the child.
In some extreme cases, child visitation simply cannot occur normally. It may be that a
case of abuse exists or that a parent is in prison, or there may be other very good reasons
for putting reasonable limits upon visitation and when and how it occurs. However, we
have never seen a case where a child shouldn’t have any visitation with the parent.
Visitation is almost always in the child’s best interests. Even if a parent is in prison or is
in a mental institution, the child should know he has a parent, and see that parent, to
understand his roots. Even if the parent is a poor role model, a child may come to
understand that her parent is mentally ill or has another problem that restricts parenting
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
abilities. The past does not have to be the future: Seeing a parent with problems can
actually help the child make a choice to be better than his parent.
10.1. FIXED VISITATION
In some cases, parents may refuse to let one spouse see the child. Sometimes it’s due to
that spouse not following agreements, such as returning the child late. Some spouses may
not allow visitation at all, just to get revenge—which hurts the child more than anyone
else. In cases where the parents act like children themselves, the Court may order that
visitation take place at certain times and places or that a parent that denies visitation pay
attorney fees. This may be costly to the parents, an attorney would probably bill at $150
per hour to enforce visitation. In many cases fixed visitation may be required.
10.2. SUPERVISED VISITATION
In cases where there is a risk to the child, or abuse may exist, supervised visitation may
be required. We believe it is important for the child to see the parent even if it must be
supervised: Children who do not see their parents may develop low levels of self-esteem
and other problems. But in rare cases, visitation may be cancelled all together.
11. FAQ AND APPENDIX SECTION
11.1. THE TOP 50+ FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS AT OUR
OFFICE
This is not legal advice. Each individual case is different, but these are the
“standard” answers to these questions. If you have a question about your case, you
need to ask your attorney for an answer based on the facts and particular
circumstances of your case.
1) I am in need of help and I can’t afford an attorney. Can you give me some
suggestions? You may want to ask for assistance from Legal Aid. Many of their
offices will do a divorce for a person with low income. Normally, attorneys charge
$1000 or more for a divorce, and the fling fees in Jefferson County are an additional
$153, (other counties typically have a $176 filing fee), and do not include a service of
process fees (typically an additional $40 or $50 to be served by Sheriff). Even though
you may not have the money for an attorney, I usually don’t suggest that anyone do
their own divorce. If you have only been together for a few months, your spouse may
be agreeable to signing an uncontested divorce so that there isn’t a lot of expense and
paperwork involved. Even if you do your own divorce, you should have an attorney
look over the paperwork before you sign any settlement agreement. If there aren’t any
questions about property, child support, or child custody—and the divorce is only a
matter of dissolving the marriage—you may be OK in doing it yourself. The main
problem with doing your own divorce is that you have to go to the trouble of going to
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
the Courthouse and doing all of the paperwork—and you probably lack the skill and
knowledge to be sure you have properly covered all aspects.
Because of the time involved, and the emotional expense and trouble, most people are
willing to pay $500 or more dollars to have an attorney prepare the uncontested
divorce paperwork. It may be far better for you to spend a little money to know your
case was properly filed and completed.
2) What should I look for in a divorce attorney? An initial consultation has
sometimes been compared to a blind date, and the comparison is not far off-base. Did
you leave the office feeling confident about the attorney? Did he keep you waiting?
Did he take calls during the meeting? Was the office shabby? Lack of attention now,
when a lawyer is presumably trying to obtain your business, does not bode well for
the future.
The lawyer you choose should be qualified in and have experience with divorces. He
or she should do quality work, put effort into your case, and not overcharge. He or she
needs to have respect for your feelings and what you want, answer your questions, and
return your calls. He or she must tell you the truth about how the legal system works
so you can use the information to plan and protect yourself. He or she shouldn’t
guarantee you will win. If your attorney doesn’t fulfill these criteria, get a refund of
your retainer and find a better attorney.
3) What should I expect from an attorney? A divorce, by its nature, requires you
to divulge information to your lawyer that even your spouse may not know. Your
lawyer must have this information to advise you. An attorney will listen to your
version of the problems in the marriage and, possibly, take notes. After hearing your
problems and concerns, the attorney might give you a brief overview of the law,
explain the different options available to you, and tell you what he or she hopes to
accomplish for you. It is impossible to predict the future of any case, but your
attorney should be able to tell you what he or she expects after the initial consultation.
Be wary of any attorney who guarantees results.
The attorney should also describe his or her professional background and explain his
or her fee structure.
Remember, your attorney is not your psychologist and is not qualified to give you
psychological advice. Questions concerning the children’s welfare or your emotional
state should be addressed to the appropriate social or mental health expert.
4) What are divorce mills? Should I use a divorce mill to get a cheap divorce?
You can save money, time, and effort by working with each other in the divorce, but
don’t cut costs by using a divorce mill: You tend to get what you pay for. The
eventual outcome of your divorce depends on the facts, the law, how the Judge views
your case, and other factors—including how good your attorney is.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
Mills attempt to cover an area and advertise heavily to get more business. They
usually have several offices in a region, and often the branch offices are staffed by
non-attorneys, paralegals, or untrained staff. Mills normally handle cases with
untrained or under-qualified personnel. Mills often do not keep clients informed
about the status of their cases. If you use an unqualified paralegal you may lose more
in property, child custody, or child support than you save in attorney fees. If you are a
young couple with no property, no children, and nothing to lose, it may be OK to
spend less. However, if children, property, or debts are involved, it is not advisable to
have poor representation. The average person will earn over one million dollars in his
or her lifetime. You can probably afford $1,000 to $3,000 for a divorce better than
you can afford losing your children or your home.
Attorneys now charge an average of $200 to $300 an hour for their time, and a
divorce may require one or two days of their time—even if it is uncontested.
Contested divorces may take weeks and thousands of dollars. You will have to decide
if you want this done right. A cheap divorce almost always costs more in the long
run.
I am an attorney. My practice is based, on part, from referrals from clients that are
treated like family, not from high-pressure advertising or slick promotional materials.
My staff and resources are located in one office. I send clients a copy of virtually
everything I send out or receive. I keep you informed and give status reports by
telephone, email, mail or in person.
5) Why do I need an attorney if my spouse and I agree on all the divorce issues?
You still need an attorney because the agreement that you are signing is often drafted
by the attorney for the other spouse, and it may be written to protect them and to place
you at a disadvantage. Unless you have a divorce attorney’s understanding of the law,
you may be signing away your children or our property. Never sign any important
document without legal advice. What you sign away, you may not be able to get
back later. Having a lawyer will insure that you have all the matters resolved
properly. Not having a lawyer almost always guarantees that you will lose property,
child support, custody, or visitation. Further, you may not understand exactly what
will later result from special terms that may be in the divorce documents.
6) Do we have a common-law marriage? There is only one state that allows and
honors common-law marriages, and it isn’t Kentucky. If you live with someone, you
generally have none of the rights that marriage gives you. You cannot receive
maintenance or marital property—only child support. Living with someone gives you
no legal status or rights in 49 states.
7) How long do I have to be a resident to file for divorce? In Kentucky, you are a
resident after 6 months. Most other states have the same residency requirement. No
state has a waiting period longer than one year.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
8) How long do I have to be a resident if children are involved? In Kentucky, and
most other states, you are a resident after 6 months. No state has a waiting period
longer than one year.
9) Do I have to move out of the house to file for divorce? No, but you cannot
share have sexual relations or hold yourself out to others as being a loving, married
couple. You may be “separated” and still share the same house.
10) What are “grounds for divorce”? What is a “no-fault” divorce? Though
there are legal grounds for divorce (adultery, abuse, abandonment, etc.), Kentucky
(like almost all other states) grants divorces based on “irreconcilable differences”.
One party must establish that the marriage is “irretrievably broken”. In a no-fault
divorce, there is no need to show any wrongdoing or fault for either party. All states
have no-fault laws and, except in rare cases, there are few reasons for alleging fault.
11) I am planning to file. What should I do? When should we separate our
joint bank and credit cards? If you suspect a contested divorce, consider doing the
following: (1) Get control of the financial records as soon as possible and make sure
the records are safe. (2) Cancel or close-out checking, savings, and credit accounts
and take control of the assets. (3) If you have important or valuable items, move them
to a safe location. (4) Do not incur any new debt and, if you know you will also be
filing bankruptcy, make certain you do not charge more than $1,000 dollars on any
one credit card within 90 days of filing bankruptcy.
Although you should not delay consulting a lawyer, you should learn as much as you
can about your family’s finances as soon as possible. Know the monthly and annual
costs of running the family home, how much you and your spouse earn, what each of
you have in savings, and where the assets are located. Find out what insurance
policies you and your spouse have, make photocopies of past filed tax returns, and
find out what assets and debts both of you have.
12) My husband claims he will not grant me a divorce. What if he will not let
me? You cannot be held prisoner in a marriage. If you want a divorce, you do not
need your spouse’s consent. You need his agreement to marry him, but not to divorce
him. A spouse can contest a divorce and disagree about the amount of child support
or alimony, how the property is to be divided, who should get custody, and what kind
of visitation should be allowed—but he can’t force you to stay married. If one partner
strongly objects to the divorce, a Judge may order a reconciliation conference to see if
the marriage is truly “broken”.
13) What should I do if I am served with a divorce complaint? You should find
an attorney immediately. If you fail to answer the complaint, you may find yourself
losing marital property, paying too much child support, or losing your right to custody
or visitation with the children. In Kentucky, you normally have just 20 days to file an
Answer in writing. If you fail to answer the complaint, a default judgment may beTHIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
granted to your spouse giving them everything and denying you everything—even
visitation with the children. You may never get the children or the property back.
14) What is an uncontested divorce? An uncontested divorce is a divorce wherein
both parties agree to all the terms of the divorce from upon the time of filing for a
divore (i.e., no litigation is needed).
15) What is mediation? Does mediation have any advantages over traditional
litigation? In order to discourage expensive and time-consuming trials, mediation is
required in many Courts. It is required in Louisville, Kentucky. In mediation, a
neutral attorney or other trained facilitator (not your or your spouse’s attorney) will
attempt to help you arrive at a settlement agreement and avoid litigation. In Jefferson
County, if a divorce is contested, the parties have to attempt mediation before a
hearing is held. The cost of mediation is divided between the two parties. Mediation
is much less expensive—and quicker—than litigation.
16) Must I go to Court to get a Divorce? No. Not if the divorce is uncontested and
the Judge is satisfied with the marital settlement agreement. Otherwise, yes unless
you get special permission from the Court.
17) What if I don’t like the Judge? Judges can recuse (remove) themselves if there
is a conflict between them and some aspect of the case. For example, if a Judge is
assigned to your case, and he is your spouse’s relative, he will recuse himself from the
case and a different Judge will be assigned. The fact that you don’t like a Judge and
he or she has ruled against you for cause, is not a basis for recusing the Judge.
18) How long does it take to get a divorce? In Kentucky, if there are no children
and the divorce is uncontested, the divorce can take as little as 30 days—sometimes
even less. (You can still be living in the same house, but you can’t be sharing a bed
and having sex.) If there are children involved, it will take at least 60 days, even if all
the parties are in agreement. If the divorce is contested, it will probably take about a
year, but may take longer if it particularly complicated or nasty.
19) What happens while I wait for the divorce? Either spouse may request a
temporary hearing while waiting for the final order so that child custody, support,
visitation, and even property may be temporarily be awarded. These temporary orders
may also include restraining orders to prevent the disposal or destruction of property.
The Judge will issue a temporary order that awards items until the final trial; however,
these temporary orders are very important because they have a tendency to become
permanent. Emergency Protective Orders and other Domestic Violence Orders act
like temporary orders and tend to become permanent orders influencing support or
custody.
20) How does the Court decide who gets Custody? The Court considers what is
“in the best interests of the child”. Factors that may be used to decide who gets
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
custody include:
 Parent’s job and residence stability
 Parent’s emotional stability (psychological evidence is a strong factor, and a Judge
may order psychological exams)
 How the child performs in school, and behaves with others, while with the parent
 What type of model the parent would be for the child
 Parent’s drug or alcohol addiction
 Previous child abuse allegations against the parent
 Whether or not the child has become used to, and is integrated into, the home
of the parent
 Whether or not custody arrangements would separate siblings
Income is not a directly a factor, but what each family could offer the child is a factor.
The fault of the spouse in the divorce is never a factor, and conduct that does not
affect a child is not considered.
Each spouse is, legally, equally entitled to custody of the child. A Court will almost
always agree with the settlement agreements of the parties. If there is no agreement,
the Court is forced to decide, based on evidence and testimony, what is best for the
child.
21) Do women automatically get the children? Gender is no longer a legal factor
in granting custody; however, women are more likely to be the petitioner (filer) in a
divorce action and still tend to win primary physical custody more often than men.
22) What is the normal visitation the Court will award? Normally, the Court will
award every other weekend, one night during alternate weeks, two weeks during the
summer, and alternating major holidays. Additional time can be agreed upon by the
parties. If there is absolute joint and equal custody, each side will get equal amounts
of time with the child.
23) What about grandparents? Do they have rights? Yes. They also can have
visitation awarded, but the standard in Kentucky is that the grandparents have to show
by clear and convincing evidence that it is in the child’s best interest.
24) What is Joint Custody and why do Judges prefer it? Joint custody means that
the parents raise the child together. It is preferred by the Court because it shows the
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
parties are more mature and will provide a better family situation. Joint custody does
not usually mean equal rights for both parents. Normally, one person is the “primary
caregiver” and controls the child the majority of the time.
25) Why share custody? Almost every study has shown that the more both parents
involve themselves with raising the children the better adjusted the child will be.
When parents share the responsibilities of raising the child, the child will do better in
life. In Kentucky, and many other states, Judges will automatically order joint
custody with one parent being the “primary caretaker” of the child. Usually, there is
very little difference between this and one parent having sole custody—since one
parent still has primary care of the child. Some cases of joint custody provide equal
caretaking of the child, with the child living exactly half the time with one parent and
half the time with the other.
26) What do I have to do to change custody? This may be done by the agreement
of both patents or by showing there has been a change in conditions since the time of
the original judgment. The change must endanger the mental, emotional, or moral
health of the child. The child’s welfare and best interests are the primary factors in
allowing a modification.
27) Can I remove the children from the state if my job changes? Normally, the
custodial parent is free to move to another state for a new job with notice provided to
the other parent.
28) How serious a crime is parental kidnapping? If the state the child was taken
from has a felony statute, it may be a Federal crime. In Kentucky, custodial
interference is a felony, and any person wrongfully taking a child from his or her
custodial parent has committed a felony.
29) How is child support decided? Child support is decided by the Child Support
Guidelines Chart. Each parent pays a pro rata share of the costs of raising the child,
including day care. Deviations from the chart are allowed. If the parents agree on a
different amount, they must show that they calculated and considered the guidelines.
If the Court sets a different amount, the Judge must submit a written explanation of
why this deviation is appropriate.
30) My ex isn’t paying child support. What do I do? If you know where your ex
lives and works, you can hire an attorney to enforce the child support order. Some
Commonwealth attorneys and County attorneys work very hard to criminally
prosecute non-payment of support; however, often cases are left alone for months or
years because of an overload. Many parents skip town and change identities to avoid
prosecution and this makes locating them difficult.
There is a very strong correlation between visitation and support: Parents who don’t
see their children have a much higher rate of non-payment. Often just allowing or
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
increasing visitation will improve support payment.
31) Is there any way to avoid paying support? A person has a duty to support
their children. In a divorce, the obligation to pay support starts with being properly
served by a motion for support. If the parent skips town before being served, support
never starts; however, if the parent is served, there are federal income tax intercepts
and many other ways to enforce collection. If a non-custodial parent fails to pay
support, he or she may be jailed—either for contempt or for the criminal failure to pay
support.
Although it is unusual, a parent’s rights may be terminated, eliminating the obligation
to pay support and ending parental rights altogether. This may be done by agreement
of the parties and is usually done because one parent is a danger or extremely negative
influence to the child. Non-payment of child support is not, by itself, sufficient to
terminate a parent’s rights to a child—normally, abandonment or more is required.
Termination requires evidence that it is in the best interests of the child.
32) Can my spouse be made to pay support while the child is in college? In
Kentucky, the Judge normally cannot and will not award support past age 18, unless
the child is still in high school. In no case will the Judge award support past age 19.
The parties may agree between themselves, however, that the child will be supported
through college. Other states allow support through age 21.
33) What are the tax issues involved with divorce? Maintenance is a tax
deduction. It is earned income for the person who gets it, and it is a deduction for the
person who pays it. Child support is not tax-deductible. By labeling support
payments alimony, instead of child support, you may reduce the taxes for one party
and increase the other’s taxes. By using this method, a couple can increase child
support by 10% or more and still have a tax savings for the wealthier spouse.
34) I don’t have the kids, but I want the tax deduction. What do I do? If the
other parent has custody, you don’t qualify for the exemption unless you obtain IRS
“Release of Claim to Exemption for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents” (Form
8332). The form must signed by the other parent. The US Tax Court may deny a
non-custodial parent’s claim for a child’s exemption even if the divorce Court ordered
that he or she be allowed the exemption.
35) How can I enforce the support order? Support orders can be enforced just
like any other garnishment or debt. They can also be enforced by contempt orders
that jail the offender or grant you property and attorney fees. Child Support may also
be enforced as a criminal action. In Kentucky, if child support is not paid for 2
months, or if the payer is $1000 dollars behind, it may be enforced as a felony
conviction. The non-paying person can be put in prison and fined, in addition to
being made to pay the delinquent amount of support.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
36) What is contempt? Contempt is the willful refusal to obey Court orders. A
person may be jailed, imprisoned, or fined for contempt.
37) Should I withhold visitation from my ex until he starts making child support
payments on time and in full? Many spouses use this as a tactic to force child
support payments, and it may work. The “official” legal answer, though, is NO. You
cannot violate one Court order in an attempt to enforce another. Support and
visitation are separate issues, and you should take your spouse back to Court if he or
she will not pay.
In addition, if you use this tactic, you are using the children—and harming them by
keeping them from their parent. You will probably escalate the argument, and you are
acting as badly as your spouse…or worse. Your children are watching you and,
eventually, they may resent you for keeping them from their other parent.
38) What should I do if I am the victim of family violence? If you are a victim of
family violence, you need to protect yourself and your children. It is important that
you remove yourself and any children from the abusive spouse and get to safety. You
must also report the abuse to the authorities. In Kentucky, and in many other states, if
you know of the abuse of a child and you do not report it, you will be prosecuted and
can be found just as guilty as the actual abuser.
The system designed to protect persons from domestic violence, however, it is often
abused. In Kentucky, the Cabinet for Health and Family Services and some County
Clerks have refused to take reports of abuse from men reporting women, but this is
becoming less common. The Cabinet will encourage a woman to report a man who is
abusing her and may even threaten to take her children or prosecute if she attempts to
stop the prosecution against her husband.
Victims of abuse can get a Court order to protect them from an abusive spouse. This
order may grant the victim custody, child support, the marital residence, and property.
Therefore, the system is often abused by persons making false claims to quickly grab
custody or property. Once the orders have been in effect for a time, they often
become permanent orders as the child becomes integrated into the new environment.
Judges in Kentucky normally grant an order of domestic violence if there is any
chance that the abuse or threatened abuse has occurred, essentially discounting any
evidence that the accused abuser brings to Court and only considering the claim of the
person alleging abuse. An article in the Louisville Courier-Journal claimed that
almost one-half of all domestic violence cases in our Courts were false claims filed to
obtain an advantage in the divorce system.
39) What is an Emergency Protective Order? An EPO is a judicial order
forbidding a person from destroying property, harming a spouse, or contacting a
spouse. The order may often include granting one spouse custody, child support, and
even alimony. Under Kentucky law, a spouse that makes a claim of domestic
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
violence and requests an EPO is given an almost automatic grant of custody and child
support—with the other spouse having little or no right to defend the claim.
40) What happens to our property in a divorce? Unless you and your spouse can
agree on how to divide the property, it will be divided by the Judge. The debts will
also be divided. Normally, property and debts are evenly divided; however, there are
factors that may change the division of property. (These factors may include one
person destroying or converting property.) Parties can agree to any division they like,
rather than having the Judge decide. As long as the property agreement is not
unconscionable, it will be granted.
41) What is marital property? What is non-marital property? Marital property
is any property that the parties earn or purchase together during the marriage.
Property that is given to or inherited by one party during the marriage, or that is
earned or owned before the marriage, is non-marital property and is not subject to
division.
42) What are prenuptial agreements? A prenuptial agreement is an agreement
made prior to a marriage that dictates what each party will get in the event of a
divorce. Prenuptial agreements are often reviewed for unfairness, and they are not
favored by the Courts. Despite this, someone with large amounts of property may be
well-advised to get a prenuptial agreement. It can document that certain property is
non-marital property.
43) My ex declared bankruptcy. Can the creditors come after me? Yes. The
divorce decree does not stop bill collectors from collecting the debt from you, even if
your spouse was ordered to pay it. It is also possible that your spouse will file
bankruptcy and that you will have to pay the debt. Seriously consider whether you or
your spouse will file bankruptcy and what guarantees your spouse will pay. For
instance, if he or she cannot afford the house, it may be best for you to either force the
sale of house or to take the house (and the debt for it), rather than trust your spouse to
pay for it. It is common for a spouse to file bankruptcy and sit in the house until
foreclosure. The mortgage company will then attempt to collect from you. A
situation like this could destroy your credit.
44) Years ago my spouse and I divorced. She got the house in the divorce
settlement. I am on the loan for the house and she is not making the payments
which she is required to do in the divorce settlement. It is ruining my credit and
they are asking me to pay. What can I do? The Court may reopen the case in
order to divide the property or resolve the situation fairly. The Court may order the
sale of the house. Divorce Courts have “continuing jurisdiction” and can enter new
orders when custody, child support, visitation, or marital property needs to be
changed to reach fair or proper results. Judges may refuse to reopen a case if you
simply failed to ask for some things you should have asked for in the first place, or if
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
the request is late or untimely.
45) What is maintenance? Maintenance is money paid by one spouse to the other
for support and to maintain his or her standard of living or to allow the person to
acquire a college degree or learn a trade or skill. It may be granted to the husband or
the wife; however, it is rarely granted to males (statistically). Maintenance is not
usually given unless one spouse is unable to provide for themselves. Even then, it
must be proven that the other spouse is able to afford the maintenance. Maintenance
can’t be awarded to one person if the other person can’t afford his or her own normal
living expenses.
Maintenance is usually granted for a limited period of time, until the receiving spouse
learns new job skills and becomes self-sufficient, but can continue until the
remarriage or death of the receiving spouse. Maintenance is usually paid over a
period of time but may be paid in one lump sum. (Child support can also be paid in
one lump sum.)
46) Can I get maintenance or child support in a no-fault case? Maintenance and
child support are generally not awarded based on fault. In rare cases, fault may be a
defense to maintenance.
47) How do I get my maiden name back? To get your maiden name back,
remember to tell your attorney to include it in the Petition. Your attorney also needs
to include it in the Judge’s final order. It is more expensive to go back and get it done
later. It is very important that you resolve all the issues at your final trial, or in your
marital settlement agreement. If you fail to have all matters resolved you will, at
least, end up paying extra legal fees for changes later.
48) What if I forgot something in the marital settlement? If you forgot to include
certain items, you may forever lose your right to bring up the issue later. In the case of
attorney’s fees, for example, you probably have lost the right to recover. In a case
where parties do not agree on custody or visitation, you would be able to go back to
Court because the Court has continuing jurisdiction over some issues (custody,
visitation, support increases and decreases). These items may need to be modified
later, especially when circumstances change.
If you simply failed to ask for something out of your own incompetence, the Judge
will not like wasting his time to reopen the case. Also, handling these issues in
several small hearings, rather than resolving them in the main divorce trial, will
dramatically increase the cost of the divorce.
49) Is it all right to date? There are no rules against dating someone while you are
divorcing, but be careful! When you are divorcing, it is a very emotional time and
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
you may be vulnerable. If a person comes along who seems to meet your needs, you
feel thankful. You may be inclined to fill the void in your life by starting a new
relationship.
You are changing. You are learning make better choices than the ones that led to this
divorce. Hopefully, you are learning that some of the strategies and models you
thought were right are wrong. You need this time alone while you re-think the roles
in your relationships. Getting into a relationship at this time may also complicate your
divorce, or heat up any existing arguments, by triggering your spouse’s jealousy.
Of course, if a person comes along that is the perfect match for you; there is no rule
against pursuing the happiness you could have. But, if you do choose to have any
romantic or sexual relationship, keep it private. Don’t throw it your spouse’s face:
He or she might respond by trying to cause you problems in Court.
50) When can I remarry? You should not remarry, or believe that you are single,
until you receive the final decree of divorce. The fact that there has been a final
hearing does not mean you can remarry.
51) My wife has remarried. Can she change the name of my child? No, your
spouse cannot change the child’s name without your permission.
52) How old do you have to be to get married? You have to be at least 18 years
old to get married in Kentucky, but you may get married under the age of 18 with
parental consent. Age is not a problem if the District Court declares you to be
emancipated and an adult. (This can be done in the case of pregnancy.) You don’t
have to be residents of the state of Kentucky to be married here, but it may cause
problems if you marry in Kentucky and return to another state that has more strict
laws about marrying.
53) What is an annulment? An annulment is a Court procedure that determines the
marriage was invalid and, so, never happened. For some people, divorce carries a
stigma and they would rather their marriage be annulled. Others prefer an annulment
because of their religion: It may be easier to remarry in their church if they have an
annulment rather than a divorce. An annulment is a claim that the marriage contract
never existed. Grounds for annulment usually include one of the following reasons:
 Underage: Either party was not of legal age at the time of the marriage.
 Relative: The parties have an existing family relationship (siblings, cousins,
etc.) that makes it illegal for them to marry.
 Mental incapacity: Either party lacked the mental capacity to make the
decision to marry.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
 Inability or refusal to consummate the marriage: Either party lacked the
ability to have sexual relationship or to have children.
 Bigamy: Either party was already married to someone else.
 Concealment: Either party concealed the fact that they were already married,
had an addiction to alcohol or drugs, had a criminal history, had children from
a prior relationship, had a sexually transmitted disease, or was impotent.
Most annulments are granted for religious reasons and take place after a marriage of
very short duration. An annulment is rarely granted if there are children.
Filing for an annulment may be an admission by you that you married someone
illegally and may say things about you that could cause you problems—even to lose
your children. Do you really want to admit you married a relative just to get an
annulment?
54) What if I want a separation? Generally, people that want a separation end up
filing two lawsuits: the separation and the divorce. There is generally no benefit to
doing this—except for the attorney who charges for two separate lawsuits. However,
a decree of legal separation does separate the finances of the party such that one
spouse cannot be responsible for bills incurred by the other spouse during the term of
the separation. Be warned, a legal separation can only come from a court. If you are
physically separated but never obtained a legal decree of separation, you can still be
held liable for the debts incurred by your spouse.
55) If you have any questions, please send them to me so I can add them to this
section
11.2. KENTUCKY STATUTES
How Custody is Determined
403.270 Custodial issues -- Best interests of child shall determine -- Joint custody
permitted -- De facto custodian.
(1) (a) As used in this chapter and KRS 405.020, unless the context requires otherwise,
“de facto custodian” means a person who has been shown by clear and convincing
evidence to have been the primary caregiver for, and financial supporter of, a child who
has resided with the person for a period of six (6) months or more if the child is under
three (3) years of age and for a period of one (1) year or more if the child is three (3) years
of age or older or has been placed by the Department for Community Based Services.
Any period of time after a legal proceeding has been commenced by a parent seeking to
regain custody of the child shall not be included in determining whether the child has
resided with the person for the required minimum period.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
(b) A person shall not be a de facto custodian until a Court determines by clear and
convincing evidence that the person meets the definition of de facto custodian established
in paragraph (a) of this subsection. Once a Court determines that a person meets the
definition of de facto custodian, the Court shall give the person the same standing in
custody matters that is given to each parent under this section and KRS 403.280, 403.340,
403.350, 403.420, and 405.020.
(2) The Court shall determine custody in accordance with the best interests of the child
and equal consideration shall be given to each parent and to any de facto custodian. The
Court shall consider all relevant factors including:
(a) The wishes of the child’s parent or parents, and any de facto custodian, as to his
custody;
(b) The wishes of the child as to his custodian;
(c) The interaction and interrelationship of the child with his parent or parents, his
siblings, and any other person who may significantly affect the child’s best interests;
(d) The child’s adjustment to his home, school, and community; (e) The mental and
physical health of all individuals involved;
(f) Information, records, and evidence of domestic violence as defined in KRS 403.720;
(g) The extent to which the child has been cared for, nurtured, and supported by any de
facto custodian;
(h) The intent of the parent or parents in placing the child with a de facto custodian; and
(i) The circumstances under which the child was placed or allowed to remain in the
custody of a de facto custodian, including whether the parent now seeking custody was
previously prevented from doing so as a result of domestic violence as defined in KRS
403.720 and whether the child was placed with a de facto custodian to allow the parent
now seeking custody to seek employment, work, or attend school.
(3) The Court shall not consider conduct of a proposed custodian that does not affect his
relationship to the child. If domestic violence and abuse is alleged, the Court shall
determine the extent to which the domestic violence and abuse has affected the child and
the child’s relationship to both parents.
(4) The abandonment of the family residence by a custodial party shall not be considered
where said party was physically harmed or was seriously threatened with physical harm
by his or her spouse, when such harm or threat of harm was causally related to the
abandonment.
(5) The Court may grant joint custody to the child’s parents, or to the child’s parents andTHIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
a de facto custodian, if it is in the best interest of the child.
(6) If the Court grants custody to a de facto custodian, the de facto custodian shall have
legal custody under the laws of the Commonwealth.
Effective: July 14, 2000
History: Amended 2000 Ky. Acts ch. 14, sec. 51, effective July 14, 2000. – Amended
1998 Ky. Acts ch. 250, sec. 1, effective July 15, 1998. -- Amended 1992 Ky. Acts ch.
169, sec. 2, effective July 14, 1992. -- Amended 1980 Ky. Acts ch. 158, sec. 1,
effective July 15, 1980. -- Amended 1978 Ky. Acts ch. 86, sec. 1, effective June 17,
1978; and ch. 369, sec. 1, effective June 17, 1978. --Created 1972 Ky. Acts ch. 182,
sec. 17.
Changing Custody
403.340 Modification of custody decree.
(1) No motion to modify a custody decree shall be made earlier than two (2) years after its
date, unless the Court permits it to be made on the basis of affidavits that there is reason
to believe that:
(a) The child’s present environment may endanger seriously his physical, mental, moral,
or emotional health; or
(b) The custodian appointed under the prior decree has placed the child with a de facto
custodian.
(2) If a Court of this state has jurisdiction pursuant to the Uniform Child Custody
Jurisdiction Act, the Court shall not modify a prior custody decree unless it finds, upon
the basis of facts that have arisen since the prior decree or that were unknown to the Court
at the time of entry of the prior decree, that a change has occurred in the circumstances of
the child or his custodian, and that the modification is necessary to serve the best interests
of the child. In applying these standards, the Court shall retain the custodian appointed
pursuant to the prior decree unless:
(a) The custodian agrees to the modification;
(b) The child has been integrated into the family of the petitioner with consent of the
custodian; or
(c) The child’s present environment endangers seriously his physical, mental, moral, or
emotional health, and the harm likely to be caused by a change of environment is
outweighed by its advantages to him; or
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
(d) The custodian has placed the child with a de facto custodian.
(3) In determining whether a child’s present environment may endanger seriously his
physical, mental, moral, or emotional health, the Court shall consider all relevant factors,
including, but not limited to:
(a) The interaction and interrelationship of the child with his parent or parents, his de
facto custodian, his siblings, and any other person who may significantly affect the child’s
best interests;
(b) The mental and physical health of all individuals involved;
(c) Repeated or substantial failure, without good cause as specified in KRS 403.240, of
either parent to observe visitation, child support, or other provisions of the decree which
affect the child, except that modification of custody orders shall not be made solely on the
basis of failure to comply with visitation or child support provisions, or on the basis of
which parent is more likely to allow visitation or pay child support;
(d) If domestic violence and abuse, as defined in KRS 403.720, is found by the Court to
exist, the extent to which the domestic violence and abuse has affected the child and the
child’s relationship to both parents.
(4) attorney fees and costs shall be assessed against a party seeking modification if the
Court finds that the modification action is vexatious and constitutes harassment.
Effective: July 15, 1998.History: Amended 1998 Ky. Acts ch. 250, sec. 3, effective
July 15, 1998. – Amended 1992 Ky. Acts ch. 414, sec. 3, effective July 14, 1992. --
Created 1972 Ky. Acts ch. 182, sec. 24.
Visitation
403.320 Visitation of minor child.
(1) A parent not granted custody of the child is entitled to reasonable visitation rights
unless the Court finds, after a hearing, that visitation would endanger seriously the child’s
physical, mental, moral, or emotional health. Upon request of either party, the Court shall
issue orders which are specific as to the frequency, timing, duration, conditions, and
method of scheduling visitation and which reflect the development age of the child.
(2) If domestic violence and abuse, as defined in KRS 403.720, has been alleged, the
Court shall, after a hearing, determine the visitation arrangement, if any, which would not
endanger seriously the child’s or the custodial parent’s physical, mental, or emotional
health.
(3) The Court may modify an order granting or denying visitation rights whenever
modification would serve the best interests of the child; but the Court shall not restrict a
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
parent’s visitation rights unless it finds that the visitation would endanger seriously the
child’s physical, mental, moral, or emotional health.
Effective: July 14, 1992
History: Amended 1992 Ky. Acts ch. 169, sec. 3, effective July 14, 1992; and ch.
414, sec. 1, effective July 14, 1992. -- Created 1972 Ky. Acts ch. 182, sec. 22.
Legislative Research Commission Note (7/14/92) This section was amended by two
1992 Acts which do not appear to be in conflict and have been compiled together.
Alimony
403.200 Maintenance -- Court may grant order for either spouse.
(1) In a proceeding for dissolution of marriage or legal separation, or a proceeding for
maintenance following dissolution of a marriage by a Court which lacked personal
jurisdiction over the absent spouse, the Court may grant a maintenance order for either
spouse only if it finds that the spouse seeking maintenance:
(a) Lacks sufficient property, including marital property apportioned to him, to provide
for his reasonable needs; and
(b) Is unable to support himself through appropriate employment or is the custodian of a
child whose condition or circumstances make it appropriate that the custodian not be
required to seek employment outside the home.
(2) The maintenance order shall be in such amounts and for such periods of time as the
Court deems just, and after considering all relevant factors including:
(a) The financial resources of the party seeking maintenance, including marital property
apportioned to him, and his ability to meet his needs independently, including the extent
to which a provision for support of a child living with the party includes a sum for that
party as custodian;
(b) The time necessary to acquire sufficient education or training to enable the party
seeking maintenance to find appropriate employment;
(c) The standard of living established during the marriage;
(d) The duration of the marriage;
(e) The age, and the physical and emotional condition of the spouse seeking maintenance;
and
(f) The ability of the spouse from whom maintenance is sought to meet his needs while
meeting those of the spouse seeking maintenance.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
History: Created 1972 Ky. Acts ch. 182, sec. 10.
Child Support
403.212 Child support guidelines -- Terms to be applied in calculations -- Table.
(1) The following provisions and child support table shall be the child support guidelines
established for the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
(2) For the purposes of the child support guidelines:
(a) “Income” means actual gross income of the parent if employed to full capacity or
potential income if unemployed or underemployed.
(b) “Gross income” includes income from any source, except as excluded in this
subsection, and includes but is not limited to income from salaries, wages, retirement and
pension funds, commissions, bonuses, dividends, severance pay, pensions, interest, trust
income, annuities, capital gains, Social Security benefits, workers’ compensation
benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, disability insurance benefits, Supplemental
Security Income (SSI), gifts, prizes, and alimony or maintenance received. Specifically
excluded are benefits received from means-tested public assistance programs, including
but not limited to public assistance as defined under Title IV-A of the Federal Social
Security Act, and food stamps.
(c) For income from self-employment, rent, royalties, proprietorship of a business, or
joint ownership of a partnership or closely held corporation, “gross income” means gross
receipts minus ordinary and necessary expenses required for self-employment or business
operation. Straight-line depreciation, using Internal Revenue Service (IRS) guidelines,
shall be the only allowable method of calculating depreciation expense in determining
gross income.
Specifically excluded from ordinary and necessary expenses for purposes of this guideline
shall be investment tax credits or any other business expenses inappropriate for
determining gross income for purposes of calculating child support. Income and expenses
from self-employment or operation of a business shall be carefully reviewed to determine
an appropriate level of gross income available to the parent to satisfy a child support
obligation. In most cases, this amount will differ from a determination of business income
for tax purposes. Expense reimbursement or in-kind payments received by a parent in the
course of employment, self-employment, or operation of a business or personal use of
business property or payments of expenses by a business, shall be counted as income if
they are significant and reduce personal living expenses such as a company or business
car, free housing, reimbursed meals, or club dues.
(d) If a parent is voluntarily unemployed or underemployed, child support shall be
calculated based on a determination of potential income, except that a determination of
potential income shall not be made for a parent who is physically or mentally
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
incapacitated or is caring for a very young child, age three (3) or younger, for whom the
parents owe a joint legal responsibility.
Potential income shall be determined based upon employment potential and probable
earnings level based on the obligor’s or obligee’s recent work history, occupational
qualifications, and prevailing job opportunities and earnings levels in the community. A
Court may find a parent to be voluntarily
Page 1 of 6. unemployed or underemployed without finding that the parent intended to
avoid or reduce the child support obligation.
(e) “Imputed child support obligation” means the amount of child support the parent
would be required to pay from application of the child support guidelines.
(f) Income statements of the parents shall be verified by documentation of both current
and past income. Suitable documentation shall include, but shall not be limited to, income
tax returns, pay-stubs, employer statements, or receipts and expenses if self-employed.
(g) “Combined monthly adjusted parental gross income” means the combined monthly
gross incomes of both parents, less any of the following payments made by the parent:
1. The amount of pre-existing orders for current maintenance for prior spouses to the
extent payment is actually made and the amount of current maintenance, if any, ordered
paid in the proceeding before the Court;
2. The amount of pre-existing orders of current child support for prior-born children to
the extent payment is actually made under those orders; and
3. A deduction for the support to the extent payment is made, if a parent is legally
responsible for and is actually providing support for other prior-born children who are not
the subject of a particular proceeding. If the prior-born children reside with that parent, an
“imputed child support obligation” shall be allowed in the amount which would result
from application of the guidelines for the support of the prior-born children.
(h) “Split custody arrangement” means a situation where each parent is the residential
custodian for one (1) or more children for whom the parents share a joint legal
responsibility.
(3) The child support obligation set forth in the child support guidelines table shall be
divided between the parents in proportion to their combined monthly adjusted parental
gross income.
(4) The child support obligation shall be the appropriate amount for the number of
children in the table for whom the parents share a joint legal responsibility. The minimum
amount of child support shall be sixty dollars ($60) per month.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.11.3. COMBINED
MONTHLY
ADJUSTED
PARENTAL
GROSS
INCOME
$ 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
(5) The Court may use its judicial discretion in determining child support in
circumstances where combined adjusted parental gross income exceeds the uppermost
levels of the guideline table.
(6) The child support obligation in a split custody arrangement shall be calculated in the
following manner:
(a) Two (2) separate child support obligation worksheets shall be prepared, one (1) for
each household, using the number of children born of the relationship in each separate
household, rather than the total number of children born of the relationship.
Page 2 of 6.(b) The nonresidential custodian with the greater monthly obligation amount
shall pay the difference between the obligation amounts, as determined by the
worksheets, to the other parent.
(7) The child support guidelines table is as follows:
GUIDELINES TABLE - TO BE USED WITH OBLIGATION WORKSHEET
ONE
CHILD
TWO
CHILDREN
THREE
CHILDREN
FOUR
CHILDREN
FIVE
CHILDREN
$ 60 $ 60 $ 60 $ 60 $ 60 60 60 60 60 60 70 70 70 70 70 80 80 80 80 80 90 90 90 90 90 100 105 110 115 120 120 125 130 135 140 THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.
SIX OR
MORE
CHILDREN
$ 60
60
70
80
90
125
145Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
700 140 156 161 166 171 800 160 203 208 213 218 900 180 261 266 271 276 1,000 195 303 325 330 335 1,100 212 324 384 389 394 1,200 229 346 433 446 451 1,300 246 367 460 504 510 1,400 262 392 491 554 576 1,500 277 417 522 588 642 1,600 293 437 548 618 674 1,700 308 458 574 647 706 1,800 322 478 599 675 736 1,900 336 495 620 699 763 2,000 350 512 642 723 789 2,100 364 529 663 747 815 2,200 376 546 684 771 841 2,300 389 563 706 795 868 2,400 401 580 727 819 894 THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.
176
223
281
340
399
456
515
582
650
717
755
788
816
844
872
900
928
956Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
2,500 413 597 749 843 920 2,600 424 614 770 867 946 2,700 435 630 790 889 970 2,800 445 646 809 911 994 2,900 455 662 829 934 1,019 3,000 465 677 849 956 1,043 3,100 475 693 868 978 1,067 3,200 485 709 888 1,001 1,092 3,300 495 725 908 1,023 1,116 3,400 506 741 928 1,045 1,140 3,500 516 757 947 1,067 1,164 3,600 526 773 967 1,090 1,189 3,700 536 790 988 1,113 1,215 3,800 548 808 1,011 1,139 1,243 3,900 559 826 1,033 1,164 1,270 4,000 571 844 1,056 1,190 1,298 4,100 580 862 1,078 1,215 1,326 4,200 592 880 1,101 1,240 1,353 THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.
984
1,012
1,038
1,064
1,090
1,116
1,142
1,168
1,194
1,220
1,246
1,272
1,299
1,329
1,359
1,388
1,418
1,448Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
4,300 603 898 1,123 1,266 1,381 4,400 615 916 1,146 1,291 1,409 4,500 626 933 1,161 1,316 1,435 4,600 636 949 1,181 1,338 1,459 4,700 647 964 1,200 1,360 1,483 4,800 657 980 1,220 1,381 1,507 4,900 667 995 1,239 1,403 1,531 5,000 676 1,010 1,257 1,424 1,554 5,100 686 1,025 1,275 1,444 1,576 5,200 695 1,039 1,294 1,465 1,599 5,300 705 1,054 1,312 1,486 1,621 5,400 714 1,069 1,330 1,506 1,644 5,500 724 1,083 1,348 1,527 1,666 5,600 733 1,098 1,367 1,548 1,689 5,700 743 1,113 1,385 1,568 1,712 5,800 753 1,127 1,403 1,589 1,734 5,900 762 1,142 1,421 1,610 1,757 6,000 772 1,157 1,440 1,630 1,779 THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.
1,477
1,507
1,535
1,561
1,586
1,612
1,637
1,661
1,685
1,709
1,733
1,757
1,781
1,805
1,829
1,853
1,877
1,901Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
6,100 781 1,171 1,458 1,651 1,802 6,200 791 1,186 1,476 1,672 1,824 6,300 800 1,198 1,498 1,690 1,844 6,400 808 1,209 1,511 1,705 1,860 6,500 816 1,219 1,524 1,720 1,876 6,600 823 1,230 1,538 1,735 1,893 6,700 830 1,240 1,551 1,750 1,909 6,800 837 1,251 1,564 1,764 1,925 6,900 844 1,261 1,577 1,779 1,942 7,000 851 1,272 1,591 1,794 1,958 7,100 858 1,282 1,604 1,809 1,975 7,200 865 1,293 1,617 1,824 1,991 7,300 872 1,303 1,630 1,839 2,007 7,400 879 1,313 1,644 1,854 2,024 7,500 885 1,324 1,657 1,869 2,040 7,600 891 1,333 1,668 1,881 2,053 7,700 896 1,342 1,679 1,893 2,066 7,800 901 1,350 1,691 1,905 2,079 THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.
1,926
1,950
1,970
1,988
2,005
2,023
2,040
2,058
2,075
2,093
2,110
2,127
2,145
2,162
2,179
2,194
2,208
2,223Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
7,900 907 1,359 1,702 1,917 2,093 8,000 912 1,368 1,713 1,929 2,106 8,100 917 1,377 1,724 1,941 2,119 8,200 922 1,386 1,736 1,953 2,133 8,300 928 1,395 1,747 1,965 2,146 8,400 933 1,404 1,758 1,977 2,159 8,500 938 1,413 1,769 1,989 2,173 8,600 944 1,421 1,780 2,002 2,186 8,700 949 1,430 1,792 2,014 2,199 8,800 954 1,437 1,800 2,024 2,210 8,900 958 1,444 1,809 2,033 2,220 9,000 962 1,450 1,817 2,042 2,230 9,100 966 1,457 1,825 2,052 2,241 9,200 971 1,463 1,833 2,061 2,251 9,300 975 1,470 1,842 2,070 2,261 9,400 979 1,476 1,850 2,079 2,271 9,500 983 1,483 1,858 2,089 2,281 9,600 988 1,489 1,866 2,098 2,291 THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.
2,238
2,252
2,267
2,281
2,296
2,311
2,325
2,340
2,354
2,366
2,376
2,387
2,398
2,408
2,419
2,430
2,440
2,4519,700 9,800 9,900 10,000 Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
992 1,496 1,874 2,107 2,301 996 1,502 1,883 2,117 2,311 1,000 1,508 1,891 2,126 2,321 1,005 1,515 1,899 2,165 2,331 Effective: July 14, 2000
History: Amended 2000 Ky. Acts ch. 430, sec. 9, effective July 14, 2000. – Amended
1998 Ky. Acts ch. 100, sec. 8, effective July 15, 1998; and ch. 255, sec. 20, effective
July 15, 1998. -- Amended 1996 Ky. Acts ch. 365, sec. 6, effective July 15, 1996. --
Amended 1994 Ky. Acts ch. 330, sec. 11, effective July 15, 1994. -- Created 1990 Ky.
Acts ch. 418, sec. 3, effective July 13, 1990. Page 6 of 6
Property Separation
403.190 Disposition of property.
(1) In a proceeding for dissolution of the marriage or for legal separation, or in a
proceeding for disposition of property following dissolution of the marriage by a Court
which lacked personal jurisdiction over the absent spouse or lacked jurisdiction to
dispose of the property, the Court shall assign each spouse’s property to him. It also shall
divide the marital property without regard to marital misconduct in just proportions
considering all relevant factors including:
(a) Contribution of each spouse to acquisition of the marital property, including
contribution of a spouse as homemaker;
(b) Value of the property set apart to each spouse;
(c) Duration of the marriage; and
(d) Economic circumstances of each spouse when the division of property is to become
effective, including the desirability of awarding the family home or the right to live
therein for reasonable periods to the spouse having custody of any children.
(2) For the purpose of this chapter, “marital property” means all property acquired by
either spouse subsequent to the marriage except:
(a) Property acquired by gift, bequest, devise, or descent during the marriage and the
income derived therefrom unless there are significant activities of either spouse which
contributed to the increase in value of said property and the income earned therefrom;
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.
2,461
2,472
2,483
2,493Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
(b) Property acquired in exchange for property acquired before the marriage or in
exchange for property acquired by gift, bequest, devise, or descent;
(c) Property acquired by a spouse after a decree of legal separation;
(d) Property excluded by valid agreement of the parties; and
(e) The increase in value of property acquired before the marriage to the extent that such
increase did not result from the efforts of the parties during marriage.
(3) All property acquired by either spouse after the marriage and before a decree of legal
separation is presumed to be marital property, regardless of whether title is held
individually or by the spouses in some form of co-ownership such as joint tenancy,
tenancy in common, tenancy by the entirety, and community property. The presumption
of marital property is overcome by a showing that the property was acquired by a method
listed in subsection (2) of this section.
(4) If the retirement benefits of one spouse are excepted from classification as marital
property, or not considered as an economic circumstance during the division of marital
property, then the retirement benefits of the other spouse shall also be excepted, or not
considered, as the case may be. However, the level of exception provided to the spouse
with the greater retirement benefit shall not exceed the level of exception provided to the
other spouse. Retirement benefits, for the purposes of this subsection shall include
retirement or disability allowances, accumulated contributions, or any other benefit of a
retirement system or plan regulated by the Employees Retirement Income Security Act of
1974, or of a public retirement system administered by an agency of a state or local
government, including deferred compensation plans created pursuant to KRS 18A.230 to
18A.275 or defined contribution or money purchase plans qualified under Section 401(a)
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended.
Effective: July 15, 1996
History: Amended 1996 Ky. Acts ch. 328, secs. 1 and 2, effective July 15, 1996. --
Amended 1986 Ky. Acts ch. 441, sec. 1, effective July 15, 1986. -- Created 1972 Ky.
Acts ch. 182, sec. 9.
Legislative Research Commission Note (7/15/96). This section was amended by
1996 Ky. Acts ch. 328, secs. 1 and 2 which do not appear to be in conflict and have
been codified together.
Emergency Protection and Domestic Violence Orders
403.740 Emergency protective order.
(1) If, upon review of the petition, as provided for in KRS 403.735, the Court determines
that the allegations contained therein indicate the presence of an immediate and present
danger of domestic violence and abuse, the Court shall issue, upon proper motion, exTHIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
parte, an emergency protective order:
(a) Restraining the adverse party from any contact or communication with the petitioner
except as directed by the Court;
(b) Restraining the adverse party from committing further acts of domestic violence and
abuse;
(c) Restraining the adverse party from disposing of or damaging any of the property of the
parties;
(d) Directing the adverse party to vacate the residence shared by the parties to the action;
(e) Utilizing the criteria set forth in KRS 403.270, 403.320, and 403.420, grant temporary
custody; or
(f) Enter other orders the Court believes will be of assistance in eliminating future acts of
domestic violence and abuse; or any combination thereof.
(2) Except as provided in KRS 403.036, if the Court issues an emergency protective order
pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, the Court shall not order or refer the parties to
mediation for resolution of the issues alleged in the petition filed pursuant to KRS
403.735.
(3) An emergency protective order issued in accordance with this section shall be issued
without bond being required of the petitioner.
(4) An emergency protective order issued in accordance with this section shall be
effective for a period of time fixed in the order, but not to exceed fourteen (14) days.
Upon the issuance of an emergency protective order, a date for a full hearing, as provided
for in KRS 403.745, shall be fixed not later than the expiration date of the emergency
protective order. An emergency protective order shall be reissued for a period not to
exceed fourteen (14) days if service has not been made on the adverse party by the fixed
Court date and time or as the Court determines is necessary for the protection of the
petitioner.
(5) The adverse party shall be personally served with a copy of the emergency protective
order, a copy of the notice setting the full hearing, and a copy of the petition. Service may
be made in the manner and by the persons authorized to serve subpoenas under the
provisions of Rule 45.03 of the Rules of Civil Procedure. No service fee shall be assessed
to the petitioner.
Effective: July 15, 1996
History: Amended 1996 Ky. Acts ch. 99, sec. 16, effective July 15, 1996. – Amended
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
1992 Ky. Acts ch. 172, sec. 6, effective July 14, 1992. -- Created 1984 Ky. Acts ch. 152,
sec. 6, effective July 13, 1984.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
11.4. DIRECTIONS TO OUR OFFICE
We are presently at the corner of Hurstbourne and Shelbyville Road. We are at 105
Daventry which is the street behind Garretts and Qmodo’s Mexican Grill. Go to the end
of Daventry we are in 105.
11.5. DIRECTIONS TO THE LOUISVILLE COURTHOUSE
If your Court appearance is in Louisville, the Courthouse is at 7th and Jefferson. If you
have a Commissioners hearing, it will be in the top floor of the old jail. Every year,
people go to the wrong Courthouse. Do not go to the Gene Snyder Federal Courthouse.
If you are coming from south Louisville, travel north on I-65 and exit in downtown
Louisville, on Jefferson Street, and head west. Do not park in front of the Courthouse:
You will be towed. You should park in one of the many downtown parking lots and
garages. Parking at a meter could cause you to get a ticket or be towed: There may be a
delay and the Court hearing may run into overtime. It may also start early, so arrive a few
minutes early to prepare for your hearing.
11.6. IMPORTANT PHONE NUMBERS
Please Note: Unless otherwise listed, all prefixes are “595”. The Area Code for
Louisville, Jefferson County, Kentucky is “502”
. This list is not complete. New numbers
may be added and existing numbers changed without notice.
Child Protective Services Hotline - 4550
Mental Inquest/Disability - 3261
Jefferson Family Court - 4745 (Cases Assigned by First Letter(s) of Last Name)
Division 1 - Judge Joan Byer (A-Brt) - 4656
Division 2 - Judge Mary L. Corey (Bru-De) - 4996
Division 3 - Judge Patricia Walker-FitzGerald (Gr-Ja) - 4326
Division 4 - Judge Juda Hellmann (Ti-Z) - 4969
Division 5 - Judge Eleanore Garber (Sci-Th) - 3013
Division 6 - Judge Jerry Bowles (Mar-O) - 4502
Division 7 - Judge Denise Clayton (P-Sch) - 4993
Division 8 - Judge Kevin L. Garvey (Df-Go) - 4043
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
Division 9 - Chief Judge Richard J. FitzGerald (Je-Map) - 4998
Family Court Support Workers
Division 1 - Kathy Clemons - 4786
Division 2 - Mary Lou Cambron - 4787
Division 3 - Rebecca Johnson - 4785
Division 4 - Karen DeFazio - 4741
Division 5 - Mari Carlton - 4783
Division 6 - Philip Moore - 4788
Division 7 - Jerrila Paul - 2326
Division 8 - Patrick Mudd - 4171
Division 9 - Kelly Williamson - 4786
Families in Transition Program - 3639
Family Court Clerks - 3116
Juvenile - 4840
Child Protective Services - 4550
Commonwealth’s attorney - 2340
Emergency Protective Orders (EPOs) - 4697
Archives/Records – 3042
Adoptions/Termination of Parental Rights (TPR) - 4433
Child Support - 574-7280
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
11.7. STANDARD ATTORNEY CONTRACT
I have received a copy of the above 60+ page explanation of my rights. I have read the
above document (manual), and I understand the terms and principles involved. I have also
reviewed my Divorce petition and the papers signed by me. After having the terms,
property rights, and child custody and support issues explained to me, I hereby state that
the facts contained therein are true to the best of my personal knowledge and belief and
that I have advised my attorney of all of my property, income, and information so that my
divorce attorney can properly prepare my case. I hereby agree that I shall pay a 450 dollar
flat fee for my uncontested divorce and that this fee is non-refundable once the divorce is
filed but it may be applied to any later divorce that I file. Prior to filing and after the
paperwork is prepared only one half of the fee is refundable.
If any work beyond the filing of an uncontested Divorce is undertaken it will be billed at
the rate of 150 dollars an hour. The filing of an uncontested Divorce does not include any
later child support increase or enforcement proceedings such as a motion for contempt or
to increase support. These are separate lawsuits and will be billed and paid for separately.
Also, if the divorce becomes contested it may be billed on an hourly rate for the work to
be done. A default divorce is considered as uncontested and is billed the same as if
uncontested.
Unless attorney fees are paid promptly the attorney retains the right to withdraw from the
proceeding at any time. Should the client write any returned checks a service fee of 25
dollars shall be paid. If the client fails to pay fees and it requires that the firm hires
separate counsel to collect any return check or unpaid legal fees the client shall pay
interests and any and all reasonable attorney expenses to collect any owed sum even if the
attorney fees to collect exceed the cost of the original attorney fee sought to be collected.
___________________________________________
Client
___________________________________________
Attorney
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.Kentucky Divorce Strategy Manual, © 2014 Dean H. Sutton. All Rights Reserved.
THIS IS AN ADVERTISEMENT.